December 13, 2017 Chair Yellen’s Press Conference FINAL  Transcript of Chair Yellen’s Press Conference December 13, 2017 CHAIR YELLEN. Good afternoon. Today the Federal Open Market Committee decide d to raise the target range for the federal funds rate by ¼ perce ntage point, bringing it to 1¼ to 1½ percent. Our decision reflect s our assessment that a gradua l removal of monetary policy accommodation will sustain a strong labor market while fosterin g a return of inflation to 2 percent, consistent with the maximum employment and price sta bility objectives assigned to us by law. Before saying more about our decision, I’ll review rec ent economic developments and the outlook. Following a slowdown in the first qu arter, economic growth step ped up to a solid 3¼ percent pace in the second and third quarters of the year. Household spending has been expanding at a moderate rate, bus iness investment has picked up , and favorable economic conditions abroad have supported e xports. Overall, we continue to expect that the economy will expand at a moderate pace. While changes in tax policy will li kely provide some lift to economic activity in coming years, the magnitude and timing of the macroeconomic effects of any tax package remain uncertain. Smoothing through hurricane-related fluctuations, job gains ave raged 170,000 per month over the three months ending in N ovember, well above estimates of the pace necessary to absorb new entrants to the labor force. The unemployment rate has dec lined further in recent months and, at 4.1 percent in November, w as modestly below the median of FOMC participants’ estimates of its longer-run normal level. Broader measures of labor market utilization have also continued to strengthen. Parti cipation in the labor force has changed little, on net, over the past four years. Given the underlyi ng downward tren d in participati on stemming largely from the aging of the U.S. population, a rel atively steady participation rate is a further sign of improved December 13, 2017 Chair Yellen’s Press Conference FINAL  conditions in the labor market. We expect that the job market will remain strong in the years ahead. You may have noticed that we alter ed the statement language abo ut the labor market outlook. This change highlights th at the Committee expects the labor market to remain strong, with sustained job creation, amp le opportunities for workers, a nd rising wages. We anticipate some further strengthening in labor market conditions in the mo nths ahead; however, we expect the pace of job gains to moderate over time as we gradually red uce the degree of monetary policy accommodation. Allowing the l abor market to overheat wo uld raise the risk that monetary policy would need to tight en abruptly at a later stage , jeopardizing the economic expansion. Even with a firming of economic growth and a stronger labor mar ket, inflation has continued to run below the FOMC’s 2 percent longer-run objectiv e. The 12-month change in the price index for personal consum ption expenditures was 1.6 perce nt in October, up a bit from the summer but still below rates se en earlier in the year. Core in flation—which excludes the volatile food and energy categories—has fo llowed a similar pattern and w as 1.4 percent in October. We continue to believe that this ye ar’s surprising softness in inf lation primarily refle cts transitory developments that are largel y unrelated to broader economic con ditions. As a result, we still expect inflation will move up and stabilize around 2 percent ov er the next couple of years. Nonetheless, as I’ve noted pr eviously, our understanding of the forces driving inflation is imperfect. As emphasized in our sta tement, we will carefully m onitor actual and expected inflation developments relative to our symmetric inflation goal . And, as I’ve noted before, we are prepared to adjust monetar y policy as needed to achieve our inflation and employment objectives over the medium term. December 13, 2017 Chair Yellen’s Press Conference FINAL  Let me turn to the economic proj ections that Committee particip ants submitted for this meeting. As always, participants conditioned their projections on their own individual views of appropriate monetary policy, which, in turn, depend on each par ticipant’s assessment of the many factors that shape the out look. The median projection for growth of inflation-adjusted gross domestic product, or real GDP, is 2½ percent this year an d next and moderates to 2 percent by 2020, a bit above its estimated longer-run rate. The median projection for the unemployment rate stands at 4.1 percent in the fourth quarter of this year a nd runs close to 4 percent over the next three years, modestly below the median estimate of its lon ger-run normal rate. Finally, the median inflation projection i s 1.7 percent this year, 1.9 perce nt next year, and 2 percent in 2019 and 2020. Compared with the projections made in September, rea l GDP growth is a little stronger, the unemployment rate i s a bit lower, a nd inflation i s essentially unchanged. Participants generally identif ied changes in tax policy as a fa ctor supporting this modestly stronger outlook, although many note d that much uncertainty rem ains about the macroeconomic effects of the specific measures that ultimately may be impleme nted. Returning to monetar y policy, for the past two years the FOMC h as been gradually increasing its target range for the federal funds rate as the e conomy has continued to make progress toward our goals of maxim um employment and price stabi lity. Our decision today continues this process. We still expect that the ongoing s trength of the economy will w arrant gradual increases in the federal funds rate. That expectation is based on our view that this rate remains somewhat below its neutral level—that is , the level that is neither expa nsionary nor contractionary and keeps the economy operating on an even keel. Because the neutr al rate currently appears to be quite low by historical standards , the federal funds rate would not have to rise much further to December 13, 2017 Chair Yellen’s Press Conference FINAL  get to a neutral policy stance. But because we also expect the neutral level of the federal funds rate to rise somewhat over time, additional gradual rate hikes are likely to be appropriate over the next few years to sustain a str ong labor market and stabilize i nflation around our 2 percent longer-run objective. Even so, the Committee continues to anti cipate that the longer-run neutral level of the federal funds rate is likely to remain below level s that prevailed in previous decades. This view is consistent with par ticipants’ projections of appro priate monetary policy. The median projection for the federal funds rate is 2.1 percent at the end of ne xt year, 2.7 percent at the end of 2019, and 3.1 percent in 2020. Compared with the projections made in September, the median path for the feder al funds rate is unchanged through 2019 and a touch higher in 2020. I should note that the economic outlook is highly uncertain, an d participants will adjust their assessments of the appropr iate path for the federal funds rate as their economic outlooks and views of the risks to the outlook change. Policy is not on a preset course. Additionally, the Committee’s ba lance sheet norm alization progr am, initiated in October, is proceeding. As we’ve noted pr eviously, changing the target range for the feder al funds rate is our primary means of adjusting the stance of monetary policy, a nd we do not foresee a need to alter our balance sheet norma lization program. Hence, our stat ement no longer mentions this program. Of course, we would be pr epared to resume reinvestmen ts if a material deterioration in the economic outlook were to warra nt a sizable reduction in the federal funds rate. Finally, I’d like to note that , although I have one more FOMC m eeting to attend in the New Year, this will be my last scheduled news conference. Over the next month and a half, I will do my utmost to ensure a sm ooth transition to my designate d successor, Jay Powell. I am confident that he is as deeply committed as I have been to the Federal Reserve’s vital public December 13, 2017 Chair Yellen’s Press Conference FINAL  mission. Thank you for being such an a ttentive audi ence these past four years. And, as always, I’ll be happy to take your questions. MARTIN CRUTSINGER. I’m Marty C rutsinger, Associated Press. Ma dam Chair, could you give us any insight int o the discussion and how it de alt with the major tax changes that Congress is considering now? T here have been thoughts that wit h these changes happening at a time when the economy is already—with unemployment so low—that the Fed may be forced to increase its pace on rate hikes . Did any of that discussion co me up in your meeting? CHAIR YELLEN. So, yes, we did di scuss tax policy, and let me s ay that most of my colleagues factored in the prospe ct of fiscal stimulus along th e lines of what’s being contemplated by Congress into the ir projections. Now, I should emphasize that some have been incorporating those expectations into their projections through out the year, so changes to the projections that you see since Se ptember should not be viewed a s an impact—an estimate of the impact of the tax package. And, i n particular, broader expecta tions of changes to fiscal policy have been reflected in financi al market conditions, I think, ov er the past year. For example, we have seen a significant increase in the stock market, and at le ast some portion of that, I would judge, likely partly reflected e xpected tax changes, and that e ffect—along with other financial market effects, which affects, f or example, projected consumer spending and would have affected wealth—that’s been part of participants’ forecasts now for some time. I think my colleagues and I are in line wit h the general expectation among most economists that the type of tax changes that are likely t o be enacted would tend to provide some modest lift to GDP growth in the coming years, and you see that—in part, that’s one of th e reasons, I think, for the uptick you see in estimated growth and decline in the unemployment rat e. December 13, 2017 Chair Yellen’s Press Conference FINAL  The views of participants, I believe, have been informed by a w ide range of analysis, including that of the Joint Committee on Taxation and other out side evaluators, and my sense is that their estimates are essentially in the same ballpark, alth ough they recognize, as I emphasized, that there is consid erable uncertainty about the im pacts, and that will have to be monitored over time. More spec ifically, they t end to see the p ackage as boosting both consumer spending and capital spending, to some extent. Now, to the extent that the c hanges do have positive impact on the growth of potential GDP and longer-run growth, let me just say that this is somethi ng that, should it occur, would be very welcome to participants, as long as it’s consistent with t he attainment of our employment and inflation objectives. I gue ss I would also urge you to rem ember that when you look at the projections, that there are ma ny factors that affect those proj ections, and changes in tax policy— that’s only one of a number of f actors, including incoming data that has, to some extent, altered the outlook for growth and infla tion. All of tha t factors into the projections you see. But I think, bottom line, whe n you look at assessments of the f unds rate path, participants continue to see gradual increases in the target r ange for the f ederal funds rate as being appropriate to sustain a strong l abor market and bring inflatio n back to 2 percent. And, look— importantly, there is a lot of uncertainty about what the likel y effects will be, and my colleagues and I will be committed, as alwa ys, to evaluating incoming data and altering the outlook as appropriate. HARRIET TORRY. Harriet Torry with Dow Jones Newswires. You an d others at the Fed have said that soft infla tion should be transitory. Are yo u confident that tha t will still be the case, particularly regarding wag e gains? They’ve been pretty m oderate in recent months, yet the December 13, 2017 Chair Yellen’s Press Conference FINAL  economy is growing and confiden ce is high. Is there something going on in the economy that’s making it difficult for businesses to raise wages? CHAIR YELLEN. So it is true that i ncoming wage data suggests o nly modest upward pressure on wages. That leaves me—that’s one factor, along wit h the fact that inflation remains low—with feeling that even though we have a 4.1 percent unemplo yment rate, that the labor market is not overheated at thi s point. Remember, the modest p ace of wage gains also probably reflects slow productivity growth. But when you ask me about t he outlook for inflation, you know, I’ve talked in detail abou t this in the past and recogniz e that there is uncertainty about what’s holding inflation down. But my colleagues and I continu e to believe that th e factors that are responsible this year for hol ding inflation down are likely to prove transitory. That said, we all agree that our inf lation objective is extremely important. We recognize that there’s been a prolonged shortfall. This is a s ymmetric 2 percent inflation o bjective, and we continue to indicate that we’ll be monitori ng inflation developments closel y. And so this is on the horizon and recognized to be one of the risks facing policy. NICK TIMIRAOS. Thank you. Nick Timiraos, the Wall Street Journal. Chair Yellen, I wanted to follow up on the questi on about tax changes. When yo u addressed it earlier today, and when you spoke to Congress last month, you often describe that you would welcome higher growth in the context of the emp loyment and inflation mandate. And I guess I wonder how you judge the major provisions of t he House and Senate tax plans: the corporate rate cut, immediate expensing of big-ticket purchases , new rates for pass-throughs, temporary rate cuts for individuals. Do you see thos e, on balance, boosting the produc tive capacity of the U.S. economy as opposed to simply increasing aggregate demand? And, related to that, how would you view December 13, 2017 Chair Yellen’s Press Conference FINAL  the benefit of such tax changes now, when the economy is nearin g full employment, versus at earlier periods when there was greater resource slack? CHAIR YELLEN. So I think my colleagues and I mainly see the li kely tax package as boosting aggregate demand, but als o having some potential to bo ost aggregate supply. So changes on the corporate tax sid e—the reduction in the corporat e tax rate, expensing—will lower the cost of capital. And while there are a range of estimates and uncertainty about how much stimulus that will provide to investment, in general I would se e some stimulus to investment. In terms of aggregate supply effects, a stronger pace of invest ment could boost capital formation and thereby raise produ ctivity growth and potential G DP or output to some extent. Exactly how large those effects might be remain uncertain, but that is a channel. And I suppose it’s also possible—I’m uncertain ho w significant this would be— that lower marginal effective tax rates for those groups that will see them could boost labor supply. And, again, there are a range of estimates in the literatures. I indicated I think participants have reviewed a number of piec es of analysis, including the Joint Committee on Taxati on estimates, and the many outside analysts who have weighed in on this and been influenced by tha t kind of analysis—but there is a good deal of uncertainty about what the impacts would be. And, to the extent that there are larger impacts than those analyses assume on aggregate s upply or potential GDP, in the co ntext of an economy that has had disturbingly low productivit y growth, that would be welcome and could support faster GDP growth, at least for some period, without—you know, without cre ating a need to tighten monetary policy to offset that. So there are potentially bot h demand and supply effects here. So, importantly, you really don’t, at the end of the day, see very much change in the feder al funds rate path. Participants do December 13, 2017 Chair Yellen’s Press Conference FINAL  recognize that the unemployment ra te is lower than their estima tes of its long-run sustainable rate, so I think we ar e in the vicinity of full employment. HEATHER LONG. Heather Long from the Washington Post. You have mentioned that the Committee thinks there will be wage increases next year. I ’m wondering if you could clarify if that is coming in part or mostl y from the changes to the tax plan. Is that what the expectation is, would drive the wage increas es? And I was also wondering, I’ve heard from so many female economists in academia and at the Fed about what an inspiration you’ve been to them and how melancholy they will be to s ee you go. I was wondering if you just had any final words to young females and minorities who may be looking to enter economics or a banking profession and rise to your level. CHAIR YELLEN. I’m sorry, remind me of the first part of your q uestion. [Laughter] HEATHER LONG. Wages. CHAIR YELLEN. Wages, yes. HEATHER LONG. Is the tax policy dr iving wage increase expectat ions? CHAIR YELLEN. Well, I think, gene rally, in a strong labor mark et where many firms are having difficulty finding quali fied workers, we would expec t, just through normal demand and supply channels, to see some upward pressure on wage growth over time. And as the labor market is tightened, we’ve seen s ome very gradual drift upward in wage gains. They remain—it remains at a low level, but I w ould expect, in the context of a n ongoing strong labor market, to see some upward pressure. And I be lieve that’s the main thing that my colleagues are factoring in. On your question on advice to women and minorities, in the Fede ral Reserve, my colleagues and I are very fo cused on wanting to see and do what we can to foster greater December 13, 2017 Chair Yellen’s Press Conference FINAL  participation of women and minor ities in economics. We would l ove to, if we could, increase our hiring ourselves of women and minorities, and we see that b oth women and minorities are studying economics in disproportiona tely and disturbingly low n umbers. Although the women in STEM fields generally are abou t even with men—represent abou t 50 percent—in economics, women majors constitute somet hing like 30 percent of undergradu ate majors, and there is disproportionate low enrollment of minorities. I will just say, from my own experience, I think economics is a terrific field. I’ve thoroughly enjoyed my career in economics and think there are m any different paths that people can follow that lead to satisfyi ng careers, and that there are very interesting and important questions that economics addresse s. And it is a great field, a nd I would like to encourage greater involvement and think that peopl e will find that satisfying. A nd, just in terms of the kinds of research that’s done in the fi eld, I think also a greater diver sity, more women and minorities, may change the focus to some ext ent of the questions that peopl e choose to look at and the analysis that they bring and a r ange of thinking that bears on research. And all of that would be a healthy development. STEVE LIESMAN. Steve Liesman, C NBC. Every day, it seems, we l ook at the stock market, it goes up triple digits in the Dow Jones. To what ext ent are there concerns at the Federal Reserve about current market valuations, and do they no w or should they, do you think, if we keep going on this trajectory— should that animate monetar y policy? Finally, maybe as a sign of what’s been going on with va luations, this cryptocurren cy called bitcoin keeps going up every day. What is the policy of t he central bank of the Unite d States of the introduction, use, and incredible rise i n popularity of bitcoin? December 13, 2017 Chair Yellen’s Press Conference FINAL  CHAIR YELLEN. Okay. So let me star t, Steve, with the stock ma rket generally. I mean, of course the stock mar ket has gone up a great deal this year, and we have in recent months characterized the general level of asset valuations as “ elevated.” What that reflects is simply the assessment that, looki ng at price/earnings ratios an d comparable metrics for other assets other than equities, we s ee ratios that are at the high end of historical ranges—and so that’s worth pointing out. But economists are not great at knowing wh at appropriate valuations are. We don’t have a terrific record, and the fact that those valuat ions are high doesn’t mean that they are necessarily overvalued. We are in a—I’ve mentioned this in my opening statement, and we ’ve talked about this repeatedly—likely a low interes t rate environment, lower than w e’ve had in past decades. And if that turns out to be the case, t hat’s a factor that supports hi gher valuations. We’re enjoying solid economic growth with low inflati on, and the risks in the global economy look more balanced than they have in many years . So I think what we need to and a re trying to think through is, if there were an adjustment in ass et valuations or the stock marke t, what impact would that have on the economy, and would it provoke fi nancial stability concerns? And I think when we look at other indicators of financial s tability risks, there’s nothing flashing red there or possibly even orange. We have a much more resilient, stronger banking system , and we’re not seeing some worrisome buildup in leverage or credit growth at successive le vels.1 So, you know, this is something that the FOMC pays attention to, but if you ask me, i s this a significant factor shaping monetary policy now, we ll, it’s on the list of risks, it’s not a major—it’s not a major factor. And then you asked about bitcoin, a nd there I would simply say that bitcoin at this time plays a very small role in the payment system. It is not a sta ble source of—store of value, and it 1 Chair Yellen intended to say that credit growth is not at excessive levels. December 13, 2017 Chair Yellen’s Press Conference FINAL  doesn’t constitute legal tender. It is a highly speculative as set, and the Fed doesn’t really play any role—any regulatory role wi th respect to bitcoin other than assuring that banking organizations that we do supervis e are attentive, that they’re appropriately managing any interactions they have with partic ipants in that market and app ropriately monitoring anti-money- laundering Bank Secrecy Act, you know, r esponsibilities that th ey have. STEVE LIESMAN. Has there been a directive, or, more importantl y, has there been a directive about bitcoin to the ba nks and their dealings with bi tcoin from the Federal Reserve? CHAIR YELLEN. I don’t believe the re’s been anything specific a bout that, just, generally, banks have Bank Secrecy Act anti-money-laundering re sponsibilities, and this applies to bitcoin as it does i n every other realm. DONNA BORAK. Hi, Chair Yelle n, Donna Borak with CNN. To retur n back to the prospective tax bill questions, in y our view at all, is the Rep ublican tax bill an ill-timed fiscal stimulus, and are you concerned at all it will wind up squander ing the tools both the Congress and the Fed have when it comes time to dealing with a recession ? CHAIR YELLEN. So, look, I will just say that it is up to the A dministration and Congress to decide on appropr iate fiscal policy, and our job is to maintain our focus on employment and inflation. We c ontinue to think, as you can see from the projections, that a gradual path of rate increases remains appropriate even with al most all participants now factoring in their assessment of the impact of the tax—the tax policy. You know, it is projected that the tax cut package will lead to additions to the national debt and boost, by the end of the hor izon, the debt-to-GDP rati o. And I will say—and this is nothing new, this is something I’v e been saying for a long time —I am personally concerned about the U.S. debt situation. It’ s not that the debt-to-GDP r atio at the moment is extraordinarily December 13, 2017 Chair Yellen’s Press Conference FINAL  or worrisomely high, but it’s als o not very low. And it’s proj ected, as the population continues to age and the baby boomers retire, that that ratio will contin ue to rise in an unsustainable fashion. So the addition to the debt, taking what is already a significant problem and making it worse, is—it is of concern to me , and I think it does suggest t hat in some future downturn, which, well, could occur just for whatever reason, the amount o f fiscal space that would exist for fiscal policy to play an active role, it will be limited—may we ll be limited. SAM FLEMING. Sam Fleming from the Financial Times . A couple of longer-term questions. First of all, midwa y through the year you talked ab out the issue of whether inflation targets might need to be raise d. There’s obviously been a lot more debate in the Fed’s system since then about this. It ma y not be an imminent issue, but do you expect it to be something the Fed should be discussing over the coming years as some sort of change to the inflation target? Second of all, the amount of stimul us tools that the Fed may ha ve at its disposal when the next downturn strikes are fairly limited. One of the incoming gover nors, Marvin Goodfriend, has talked about the merits of negativ e interest rates. I just won dered whether you see that as a potential—or at least in theory, f or the Fed to consider should it run out of other options. Thanks. CHAIR YELLEN. So right now the F OMC is not discussing or consi dering its inflation target. We do see inflation as likely moving up to target over the next couple of years, and I would say—you said our stimulus too ls are limited. I would wan t to emphasize that if there were a negative shock to the econom y, we do have some scope to cut t he fed funds rate, and there are other tools available, ones that we have used previously: forw ard guidance and asset purchases. So I think we’re not—I wouldn’t say that we’re out of ammunitio n, but certainly it’s been recognized—and I’ve emphasized mys elf that, in the longer run, we may be—and we’ll have to December 13, 2017 Chair Yellen’s Press Conference FINAL  see how this works out, but we ma y be in low interest rate envi ronments where it could prove useful to have additional scope to conduct monetary policy. An d, in that context, I think additional research—the academic economists and others are thin king hard about what more could be done, and I think these are matters that are certainly worthy of further study. SAM FLEMING. So you do believe tha t negative interest rates, a t least in theory, are possible in the U.S. at some point if it should be necessary—at least in theory. CHAIR YELLEN. So, I mean, on that I would say we have—that’s n ot something that we have studied inside the Fed t o any considerable extent and h aven’t seriously thought about using ourselves during this las t downturn and recovery. We hav e watched what’s happened in other countries. I think that ’s worthwhile. And I would say i t’s an area that academics may have interest in in the future and i s worthy of some study, but it h asn’t been part of the Fed’s agenda. VICTORIA GUIDA. Hi, C hair Yellen. Victoria Guida with Politic o. I just wanted to ask you quickly, on the regulator y side, in your testimony to C ongress recently you spoke positively about the Senate bank re gulatory reform bill, and I was wondering if there are— beyond that bill—if there are tweaks to Dodd-Frank that you thi nk might still be beneficial. And then, somewhat related, Governor Powell recently said that ther e are currently no U.S. banks that are too big to fail. And I w as wondering, do you agree with th at assessment? CHAIR YELLEN. Well, I mea n, you know, I think I’m not familiar with every detail of the bill, but I think the bill does address a wide range of iss ues that, you know, we’ve highlighted in the past as being ones where pe rhaps additiona l flexibility to tailor our supervisory requirements would be worthwhile. So I don’t have additional t hings on the congressional list. Sorry, and what—the other thing— VICTORIA GUIDA. T oo big to fail. December 13, 2017 Chair Yellen’s Press Conference FINAL  CHAIR YELLEN. Oh, too big to fail. VICTORIA GUIDA. Are there any banks that are too big to fail r ight now? CHAIR YELLEN. So, you know, we con tinue to work seriously on r esolution and the resolution plans, the living wills, and the structure of system ic firms to ensure that it would be possible to resolve a firm—unde r the bankruptcy code would be t he top choice of methods, or, alternatively, under the Orde rly Liquidation Authority. And I think it’s fair to say that, over time, we have learned more ourselves and more clearly detailed our expectations for the firms that file living wills. And the firms themselves have made con siderable progress in, you know, changing what they do, whether it ’s adopting financial contract s that would facilitate a resolution rather than a disorderly unwi nding of contracts, making sure th at they’re appropr iately dealing with shared services so that ke y services would be able to cont inue, governance arrangements, legal entity structures—the fi rms have all made progress in ada pting to our expectations of what would enable a successful res olution. So I think it’s an ongoi ng process, and I believe we have made substantial progress. BINYAMIN APPELBAUM. Binya Appelbaum, the New York Times . I’m struggling to reconcile the pieces of the economic outlook that you’ve descri bed today. You’ve said that we are basically at full employme nt. You’ve said that you’re expe cting a tax package to deliver a significant stimulus, and that it will be on the demand side. You expect growth to be faster. You expect unemployment to be lower , and yet somehow inflation is g oing to remain at 2 percent for the foreseeable future. Coul d you describe what has changed ab out your economic assessment so that everything has cha nged except inflation? CHAIR YELLEN. Well, you know, the proj ections that we’re showi ng you today, many factors went into that, fis cal policy being one of a number of different factors. And, you know, December 13, 2017 Chair Yellen’s Press Conference FINAL  you’re looking at 16 participants w ho have made adjustments to their economic outlook for a whole variety of reasons, includ ing, in some cases, rethinking some of the fundamentals that went into their original forecast. So there have been modifica tions in different directions by different participants. So I would caution you about the dang ers of looking at the median and acting like that is on e individual who has made a change to the ir forecast. That’s a leap that isn’t quite justified. But, look, generally, you see modes tly faster growth over the n ext couple of years, which is consistent and, I said, I thi nk for most participants, refle cts partly an impact from taxes stimulating consumer and investment spending. But it’s not a g igantic increase in growth that since—relative to September. You do see a lower path for unemployment, but remember that inf lation has also been running low on a persistent basis, and the Committee does have a concern about inflation and wants to see it moving up. And, on balance, you see only modes t changes, slight revisions to the path for the fed funds rate . You might think, well, shouldn’t I see more? Well, okay, growth is a little stronger, the unemployment rate runs a little bit lower— that would perhaps push in the direction of slightly tighter monetary policy. But, again, cou nterbalancing that is that inflation has run lower than we expect , and, you know, it could take a lo nger period of a very strong labor market in order to achieve the inflation objective. JUSTINE UNDERHILL. Justine Un derhill, Yahoo Finance. So Willi am Dudley of the New York Fed recently said that th e Fed is exploring the idea o f potentially having its own cryptocurrency or digital cu rrency. What use do you see a cryp tocurrency could have for the Fed, and do you see the potential of a cryptocurrency that migh t be considered legal tender? December 13, 2017 Chair Yellen’s Press Conference FINAL  CHAIR YELLEN. So I want to disti nguish carefully between digit al currency and cryptocurrency. This is—there is a discussion going on among c entral bankers about the potential merits of adopting—a central bank itself adopting a d igital currency. And there might even be a central banker or tw o around the globe that might go in that direction. But I really want to caution that this is not s omething the Federal Reserve is seriously considering at this stage while we’re looking at re search on this to pic. There are , I think, to my mind, limited benefits from introducing it, a limited need for it, and some s ubstantial concerns. And so I would really doubt that the Federal Reserve would soon go in that dir ection. But it is something that central banks are looking at to s ee if there could be benefits from doing it. CRAIG TORRES. Chair Yellen, before I ask this question, thanks for your stewardship of the economy, the benefits of w hich I’ve seen in some of the harder-hit parts of my own family, so— CHAIR YELLEN. Thank you. CRAIG TORRES. Your tenure. We’ ve seen six Federal Reserve pre sidents appointed. One was a woman and five are m en, so I’d like to know how that comports with your commitment to gender diversity. And, second, I wonder if you t hink this process of appointing Reserve Bank presidents needs t o be more transparent and accoun table. Recently, the Richmond Fed board took 11 months, and they c ame up with a candidate who was another Fed board member. And so I’m wondering wha t you would say to critics who say that looks like cronyism, and if you think, you know, this coul d be simply a more open pr ocess. These are votes on national monetary policy, after all. CHAIR YELLEN. So I would agree w ith you that these are importa nt appointments. Under the Federal Reserve Act , the nonbanking directors of the Reserve Banks have December 13, 2017 Chair Yellen’s Press Conference FINAL  responsibility for conducting a s earch, and the Board of Govern ors has to sign off on the candidates. We’ve made very c lear and we monitor ongoing searc hes very carefully to make sure that absolutely every effo rt is made to create a pool that is diverse, and t hat there be a national search, and that every a ttempt should be made to creat e a diverse pool. At the end of the day, we cannot guarantee that the outcomes of these searches wi ll result in an increase in diversity. I mean, I’ve been ver y pleased to see that there’s been some success in that regard, but we have signed off on the indivi duals who were appointed and ha ve held the view that these are individuals who were qualified to serve in these positions. So I would hope—I would hope to see greater diversity. It has b een a challenge to achieve that . CRAIG TORRES. Should the pro cess be more open somehow? CHAIR YELLEN. Well, I think the pr ocess has become more open, and in a number of the recent searches there has been outreach—public outreach, in formation on websites, acceptance of potential names and nominees, and those have gott en careful consideration. There has been—there have been meetings in some cases with community groups to try to enlarge the pool and get suggestions, and I thi nk that’s appropriate, and I think it has move d in the direction you’re suggesting. NANCY MARSHALL-GENZER . Nancy Marshall-Genzer with Marketplace. I’m wondering if you have any advice for incoming Chair Powell? CHAIR YELLEN. Well, my colleague —I’ve had the pleasure of work ing with him now for many years, and he is somebody who understands the Federal Reserve very well and shares its values. And as I mentione d in my opening statement, he is committed to the mission of the Fed; to its independence; and t o its acting in a nonpartisan, n onpolitical way. He is somebody who has participated in the FOMC now for many years. To the be st of my knowledge, he has December 13, 2017 Chair Yellen’s Press Conference FINAL  been part of the consensus. I don’ t believe he’s ever dissente d. I think there is strong consensus in the Committee for the gradua l approach that we have been pur suing, and Governor Powell has been part of that consensus, so I feel he’s very well positione d and very knowledgeable of all the ins and outs of everything tha t the Fed does. In supervision, in the payment system—he’s played an active role there—and in m onetary policy, and I have confide nce that he is very capable of steering the Federal Reser ve in the years ahead. JOHN HELTMAN. Do you mean me, or—as long as everyone gets a tu rn. This is John Heltman with the American Banker. Sort of a related question to w hat Nancy was asking—there have been some reservations among some Democratic senators rece ntly during Governor Powell’s confirmation hearing a nd during the markup of the reg relief bill about the approach towards regulation that the new leadership appears to be adopti ng. Do you have any similar reservations about the new leader ship’s ability t o deregulate i n an evenhanded way that keeps an eye towards the stability of the financial system and the—sort of, the advances that have come from post-crisis regulation? CHAIR YELLEN. So I would say that all of my colleagues on the Board have expressed a strong commitment to keep in place the core reforms that have produced a stronger financial system. And I’m considering th ere stronger capital, particular ly for the most systemic institutions—higher-quality capit al, stronger liquidity require ments, a rigorous stress-testing program, and resolution planning that will make it more possibl e to resolve a firm that encounters signifi cant distress. So I have heard broad-based commitm ent to those things, and I t hink they are the core of the reforms we have put in plac e. I think all of us agree that it is appropriate t o tailor regulatory requirements in all of those are as and others to the systemic f ootprint of firms. We have done a December 13, 2017 Chair Yellen’s Press Conference FINAL  lot to do that, and I think ther e is more that could be done, a nd in some areas it would require legislation in order to do that . But I believe all of my colle agues and I are in agreement on that, and we’re also focused on commun ity banks and want to find ways to relieve burdens. So in those important ways, I do think t hat all of my colleagues are in the same place with respect to their priorities. JOHN HELTMAN. Are there any important differences between your colleagues and your vision on regulatory reform? CHAIR YELLEN. So I have not seen a nything emerge at this point that I would describe as a significant difference. HOWARD SCHNEIDER. Hi, Howard S chneider with Reuters. So you m entioned in response to Steve’s question t hat asset valuations, you didn’t think, were on the sort of high- priority risk list right no w. So I’m wondering, what do you th ink is on that risk list? And, more broadly, what have you left undone ? You’ve gotten high marks f or bringing the economy back towards its goals, but are the re things that are going to nag y ou when you walk out of here in February and say, “Really, I wis h I’d seen this to completion”? I mean, we’re not doing negative interest rates. We’re not doing i nflation framework. What’s a t your top of—what’s at the top of the to-do list that you are not getting to see to bring to grou nd here? CHAIR YELLEN. So you asked about t he risk list. There are alw ays risks that affect the outlook. We tend to focus in our ow n evaluation on economic ri sks, and we’ve characterized them as “balanced.” And I t hink they are balanced. You know, I can always give you a list of, you know, potential troubles, interna tional developments that c ould result in downside economic risk. But, look, at the moment t he U.S. economy is performing well. The growth that we’re seeing, it’s not based on, for ex ample, an unsustainable buildu p of debt as we had in the run-up December 13, 2017 Chair Yellen’s Press Conference FINAL  to the financial crisis. The global economy is doing well. We ’re in a synchronized expansion. This is the first time in many y ears that we’ve seen this. Inf lation around the world is generally low. So I think the risks are ba lanced, and there’s less to lo se sleep about now t han has been true for quite some time, so I feel good about the economic out—the economic outlook. I feel, you know, good that th e labor market is in a very much stronger place than it was eight years ago. We have created 17 million jobs. We’ve got a good, strong labor market and a very low unemployment rate, and I think that’s been tremendousl y important to the well-being of American households and workers . And I feel very pleased when I hear anecdotes from firms that tell me they’re having a hard time finding workers, and th ey talk about, given that they’re taking on people with skills that don’t quite match what they w ant, but they’re training them, and, you know, giving them the traini ng that they need in order to be able to fill jobs. I think that’s a development that is a natural one that occurs in a str ong labor market that tends to build human capital and worker skills , and that that’s a strong posit ive. As I mentioned, I think the finan cial system is on much sounder footing, and that we have done a great deal to put in place gr eater capital, liquidity, a nd so forth that ma ke it less crisis prone, and that has been a n important objective. What’s on my “undone” list, you ask? We have a 2 percent symme tric inflation objective, and, for a number of years now, inflation has been r unning under 2 percent. And I consider it an important prior ity to make sure that inflation d oesn’t chronically undershoot our 2 percent objective, and I wa nt to see it move up to 2 percent. So most of my colleagues and I do believe that it’s being held dow n by transitory factors, but th ere’s work undone there, in the sense—we need to see it move up in line with ou r objective. December 13, 2017 Chair Yellen’s Press Conference FINAL  GREG ROBB. Thank you. Chair Y ellen, what do you think will be the drivers of inflation over the next couple of years, and how long will the Committee go with low unemployment, low inflation befo re you rethink monetary policy— this gradual rate hikes? Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN. So, you know, I think f or a number of years—so w e’ve had an undershoot of inflation for a numbe r of years. We absolutely r ecognize that. I think until this year, undershoot was understandab le. First we had a good deal of slack in the labor market. Then we had plummeting oil pr ices. And, beginning in mid-2014, there was a marked depreciation in the dollar.2 And those three factors hel d down inflation for a number of y ears. Now, in 2016, core inflation came very close to 2 percent. We seemed to be on a path of inflation moving up, and this ye ar, beginning in March, there s eemed to be a sequence of negative surprises. Some reflec t one-time factors that were ea sily identifiable, like a marked decline in quality-adjusted cel l phone plans. There may be oth er factors that are not so easy to name, but we would judge—you know, inf lation doesn’t always fol low exactly. There are errors and many factors that affect i t beyond the key influences of la bor market slack: exchange rates and import prices and oil prices . Those are three big ones. B ut there are other factors that affect inflation too, and our judgment at this point is that transitor y factors that are unrelated to the broader macroeconomic outl ook are holding inflation down. But I have tried to be straightfo rward in saying that this coul d end up being something that is more ingrained and tur ns out to be permanent. It’s ver y important to watch it and, if necessary, rethink what’s determ ining inflation. A possibility is that the longer-run sustainable 2 Chair Yellen intended to say that, beginning in mid-2014, ther e was a marked appreciation of the dollar. December 13, 2017 Chair Yellen’s Press Conference FINAL  rate of unemployment is—it’s b een coming down. Estimates in th e Committee have come down. It’s conceivable that they n eed to come down even more. It’s not my judgment that inflat ion expectations have slipped, but that also remains a possibility that needs to be monitored. So there are—you know, there could be a rethink of inflation. I think it’s importa nt to watch inflation outcomes carefully and, if we don’t see inflation moving in the manner that the Committee anticipates, to alter policy so that we do achieve our 2 percent ob jective. But, at the moment, most of m y colleagues and I believe we are on track to achieve it. JIM PUZZANGHERA. Hi, Chair Ye llen. Jim Puzzanghera with the Los Angeles Times. I’m wondering, you mentioned this i s your last news conference. What are your plans when you step down from the Fed? Are you going to remain in Washington? Will you go back to Berkeley? And, also, I’m curi ous if you have any disappointmen t that you’re not going to be continuing in this job as some of your predecessors have done. CHAIR YELLEN. So, on my plans, I don’t have anything definite for you, I guess. I have a home in Berkeley and expect to maintain it. But I would say, my spouse is on the faculty—he’s a professor at Geo rgetown and would like to stay i n his job, and we expect to maintain Washington as our base . But I don’t have any definite plans. Let’s see. And you asked me if I’m disappointed. So let me ju st say that I have served in senior positions in the Federal Reserve now for quite a long ti me. I became president in San Francisco in 2004, and I’ve particip ated in the FOMC since that time as president, as Vice Chair, and as Chair, and it’s been an imm ensely rewarding experience f or me. I feel very positive about what we’ve been able to accomplish and feel tremendous, you kno w, loyalty to the institution. So I did make the judgment that this is the right time for me t o leave, but I feel I have served in December 13, 2017 Chair Yellen’s Press Conference FINAL  senior positions at the Fed for a long time, and it’s really be en an honor and a priv ilege for me to have had a chance to do so. ADAM SHAPIRO. Adam Shapiro with Fox Business. Glad to hear yo u’re staying on the East Coast. I’m just curi ous, I wanted to follow up to the bitcoin questions, but—because you’ve lived through what we a ll experienced in 2007, 2008, and —should the Fed take a more active role in trying to iden tify who some of the counterparty and what the exposure is with bitcoin as a potential threat to f inancial stability? Just—the best minds at the Fed can sometimes miss these kinds of threats. Your predecessor, Mr. Bernanke, a ctually said in ’07 that the contagion from subprime would not affect the housing market or the economy. So are we underestimating the potential threat from bitcoin as it runs up in value? CHAIR YELLEN. Well, I certainly a gree that it’s important for the Fed to attempt to understand emerging risks to finan cial stability and to be look ing not just in the banking system but outside it for developments t hat could pose financial risks , and we are doing that. And, I would say, one of the changes durin g my tenure is, we devoted—d ecided in the aftermath of the crisis that we needed to devote considerable resources to finan cial stability to monitor for emerging threats, and now we have a t the Board a full-blown div ision of financial stability that’s involved in doing that. Now, when you ask about bitcoin, I still see the financial stab ility risks from it as limited. Often, risks threatening financial stability arise when there’s exposure of the banking system to fluctuating asset valuations, a nd I really don’t see any signif icant exposure of our core financial institutions to threats from b itcoin if its value were to fluct uate. I don’t see a threat to our core financial institutions. So, undoubtedly, there are individuals who could lose a lot of money if December 13, 2017 Chair Yellen’s Press Conference FINAL  bitcoin were to fall in price , but I really don’t see that as c reating a full-blown financial stability risk. MICHAEL MCKEE. Michael McKee fr om Bloomberg Television and Rad io. I suppose I should be asking you a valedictor y question since it’s the la st question, but I don’t think you can top what you’ve already said, s o let me just do a couple of cleanup questions here. President Trump, while you were speaking, jus t said that he thinks his ta x plan will produce 4 percent growth. Do you think that is pos sible? Second, do you think t hat there is any Fed blame or complicity in the flattening of the yield curve, and are you wo rried that there might be some sort of policy mistake built into that that could slow the economy? And the last question, which is a bit of a valedictory, is one that everybody on Wall Street has wanted to ask you for four years. Since this is your last press conference, can you tell us which dot is yours? [Laughter] CHAIR YELLEN. Well, I can answer the last question first. The answer is “no.” I’ve never been willing to reveal which dot is mine, and I’m not goi ng to change that now. So, you know, my assessment, and I think most participants’ ass essments, as I said, of the impact of the tax policy on grow th has been informed by work by the Joint Committee on Taxation and other analysts. A nd everyone recognizes that ther e’s uncertainty about what the economic effects would be, and I w ouldn’t want to rule anything out. It is challenging, however, to achieve growth of the level s that you mentioned. Look, if t he package were to stimulate growth of that magnitude, let me just say again, the Federal Re serve would welcome that. If it’s a supply-side—favorable supply-si de developments that would be compatible with the attainment of our employment a nd inflation objectives, that’s s omething that would be very, very welcome. But it would be challe nging to achieve numbers like t hat. December 13, 2017 Chair Yellen’s Press Conference FINAL  Let’s see, I think you also then ask ed me about the yield curve , and—I mean, there is much discussion about yield curve inversions and whether or not a flattening yield curve could signal a recession. Is that t he brunt of your question? MICHAEL MCKEE. And whether the F ed has made—if there’s a polic y mistake embedded in that. CHAIR YELLEN. So this is somethi ng that we discussed and have looked at. The yield curve has flattened some as we have raised short rates. It mai nly—the flattening yield curve mainly reflects higher short-t erm rates. The yield curve is no t currently inverted, and I would say that the current slope is we ll within its historical range. Now, there is a strong correla tion historically between yield c urve inversions and recessions, but let me emphasize that correlation is not causat ion, and I think that there are good reasons to think that the relati onship between the slope of the yield curve and the business cycle may have changed. And one reason for that is that long-term in terest rates generally embody two factors. One is the expected average value of short rates over, say, 10 years, and the second piece of it is a so-ca lled term premium that often reflects thi ngs like inflation—inflation risk. Typically, the term premium historically has been positive. So when the yield curve has inverted historically, it meant that short-term rates were well above average expected short rates over the longer run. So with the positive term premium, that’s what it means. And typically that means that monetary policy is restrictive, sometimes quite rest rictive, and some of those recessions were situations in which the Fed was consciously tig htening monetary policy because inflation was high and trying to slow the economy. Well, right now the term premiu m is estimated to be quite low, close to zero, and that means that, structurally—and thi s can be true going forward—tha t the yield curve is likely to be December 13, 2017 Chair Yellen’s Press Conference FINAL  flatter than it’s been in the pa st. And so it could more easil y invert. If the Fed were to even move to a slightly restrictiv e policy stance, you could see an inversion with a zero term premium. So I think the fact the term pr emium is so low and the yield cu rve is generally flatter is an important factor to consider. Now , I think it’s also important to realize that mar ket participants are not expressing heightened conc ern about the decline of the term premium, and, when asked directly about the odds of recession, they see it as low, and I would concur with that judgment. Thanks very much.