March 18, 2015 Chair Yellen’s P ress Conference FINAL  Transcript of Chair Yellen’s FOMC Press Conference March 18, 2015 CHAIR YELLEN. Good afternoon. A s you know, the Federal Open M arket Committee this afternoon reaffirmed the c urrent 0 to ¼ percent target ran ge for the federal funds rate. We also updated our forward guidance, indicating that an increase in the target range for the federal funds rate remains unlikely at our next meeting in April. With continued improvement in economic conditions, however, we do not want to rule out the po ssibility that an increase in the target range could be warranted a t subsequent meetings. Let me emphasize, however, that the timing of the initial increase in the target range will depend on the Committee’s assessment of incoming information. Today’s modification of our guidance sho uld not be interpreted to mean that we have decided on the timi ng of that increase. In other words, just because we removed the word “patient” from the statem ent doesn’t mean we are going to be impatient. Moreover, even after the initial increase in t he target funds rate, our policy is likely to remain highly accommodative to support continued progress toward our objectiv es of maximum employment and 2 percent inflation. I’ll co me back to today’s policy deci sions in a few moments, but first I would like to review economic de velopments and the outlook, whi ch formed the basis for our policy decisions. We have seen continued progress toward our objective of maximum employment. The pace of employment growth has remained strong, with job gains a veraging nearly 290,000 per month over the past three months. The unemployment rate was 5. 5 percent in February; that’s three-tenths lower than the late st reading available at the tim e of our December meeting. Broader measures of job market conditions—such as those countin g individuals who want and are available to work but have not actively searched recently a nd people who are working part time but would rather work full time—have shown similar improve ment. As we noted in our March 18, 2015 Chair Yellen’s P ress Conference FINAL  statement, slack in the labor market continues to diminish. Me anwhile, the labor force participation rate—the percenta ge of working-age Americans eith er working or seeking work— is lower than most estimates of its trend, and wage growth rema ins sluggish, suggesting that some cyclical weakness persists . So considerable progress clea rly has been achieved, but room for further improvement in the labor market continues. We continue to expect sufficien t underlying strength in economi c growth to support ongoing improvement in the labor m arket. After averaging about 2½ percent over 2014, growth of real gross domestic product a ppears to have slowed in the fi rst quarter of this year, in part reflecting a moderation in hous ehold spending. In addition, th e recovery in the housing sector remains subdued, and export growth looks to have weakened. Loo king ahead, however, the Committee continues to expect a moderate pace of GDP growth, wi th robust job gains and lower energy prices supporting household spending. Inflation has declined further below our longer-run objective, largely reflecting the lower energy prices I just mentioned. D eclining import prices have a lso restrained inflation, and in light of the recent appreciation of the dollar, will likely con tinue to do so in the months ahead. My colleagues and I continue to e xpect that as the effects of t hese transitory factors dissipate and as the labor market improves fu rther, inflation will move gradu ally back toward our 2 percent objective over the medium term. In making this forecast, we ar e attentive to the low levels of market-based measures of inflation compensation. In contrast, survey-based measures of longer- term inflation expectations have r emained stable. The Committe e will continue to monitor inflation developments carefully. This assessment of the outlook is reflected in the individual e conomic projections submitted for this meeting by the FOMC participants. As always , each participant’s projections March 18, 2015 Chair Yellen’s P ress Conference FINAL  are conditioned on his or her own view of appropriate monetary policy. The unemployment rate projections over the next few y ears and in the longer run are g enerally a bit lower than the December projections. At the end of this year, the central ten dency for the unemployment rate stands at 5 to 5.2 percent, in line with participants’ estimate s of the longer-run normal unemployment rate. Committee participants generally see the un employment rate declining a little further ove r the course of 2016 and 2017. For economic growth, participan ts generally reduced their projections since December, with many citing a we aker outlook for net exports. Nonetheless, the central tende ncy of the growth projections for this year and next, at 2.3 to 2.7 percent, remains somewhat above estimates of the longer-run nor mal growth rate. Finally, FOMC participants project infla tion to be quite low this year, largely reflecting lower energy and import prices. The central ten dency of the inflation projectio ns for this year is now below 1 percent, down noticeably since Dec ember. As the transitory fac tors holding down inflation abate, the central tendenc y rebounds to 1.7 to 1.9 percent next year and rises to 1.9 to 2 percent in 2017. Returning to monetar y policy, as I noted at the outset, the Com mittee reaffirmed its view that the current 0 to ¼ percent targ et range for the federal fu nds rate remains appropriate. But with economic conditions improving, and with further improvemen t expected in the months ahead, we have again modified our forward guidance. In Decembe r and January, the Committee judged that it could be patient in beginning to normalize the s tance of monetary policy. That meant that we considered it unlikely that economic conditions w ould warrant an increase in the target range for the federal f unds rate for at least the next c ouple of FOMC meeti ngs. While it is still the case that we consider it unlikely that economic condi tions will warrant an increase in the March 18, 2015 Chair Yellen’s P ress Conference FINAL  target range at the April meeting, such an increase could be wa rranted at any later meeting, depending on how the economy evolves. Let me emphasize again that toda y’s modification of the forward guidance should not be read as indicating that the Com mittee has decided on the timing of the initial increase in the target range for the federal f unds rate. In particular, this c hange does not mean that an increase will necessarily occu r in June, although we can’t rule that out . As we noted in our statement, the decision to raise the target range will depend on our assessmen t of realized and expected progress toward our objectives of maximum employment and 2 perc ent inflation. We continue to base that assessment on a wid e range of information, includi ng measures of labor market conditions, indicators of inflati on pressures and inflation exp ectations, and readings on financial and international developments. W e anticipate that it will be appropriate to raise the target range for the federal funds rate when the Committee has seen further improvement in the labor market and is reasonably confident that inflation will move back to it s 2 percent objective over the medium term. Once we begin to remove policy acc ommodation, we continue to ex pect that—in the words of our statement—“even after employment and inflation are near mandate-consistent levels, economic conditions may, for some time, warrant keeping the target federal funds rate below levels the Committee view s as normal in the longer run.” This guidance is consistent with t he paths for appropriate poli cy reported by FOMC participants. Compared with the projections made in December, most participants lowered their path for the federal funds rat e, consistent with the downward r evisions made to the projections for GDP growth and inflation as well as somewhat lower estimate s of the longer-run normal unemployment rate. The median pr ojection for the federal funds rate is just below 2 percent in March 18, 2015 Chair Yellen’s P ress Conference FINAL  late 2016 and rises a bit above 3 pe rcent in late 2017. The me dian projected rate in 2017 remains below the 3¾ percent or so projec ted by most participants as th e rate’s longer-run value, even though the central tendency of the unemployment rate by that ti me is slightly below that of its estimated longer-run value, and the central tendency for inflat ion is close to our 2 percent objective. Participants provide a number of explanations for t he federal funds rate running below its normal longer-run level a t that time. These include, in particular, the residual effects of the financial crisis, which are likely to continue to constrain spending and credit availability for some time. I would like to emphasize that these forecasts of t he appropriate path of the federal funds rate are conditional on par ticipants’ individual projecti ons for economic output, inflation, and other factors. But our actua l policy actions over time wil l be data dependent. Accordingly, if the expansion proves to be mor e vigorous than currently anti cipated and inflation moves higher than expected, then the a ppropriate path would likely fo llow a steeper and higher trajectory; conversely, if conditi ons were to prove weaker, the n the appropriate trajectory would be lower and less steep. Finally, the Committee will continue its policy of reinvesting proceeds from maturing Treasury securities a nd principal payments from agency debt and mortgage-backed securities. The Committee’s sizable holdings of longer-term securities shou ld help maintain accommodative financial conditions and promot e further progress toward our ob jectives. Thank you. Now I’d be happy to take your questions. HOWARD SCHNEIDER. Howard Schneider with Reute rs. Hi, thank you. So there’s been this pretty consistent ref erence to expectations of above- trend growth over the last few months. Now we’re seeing growt h downgraded in the context of v ery explicit references to international and external c onditions: weak export growth, oil dragging down inflation, and your March 18, 2015 Chair Yellen’s P ress Conference FINAL  own comments now on the dollar. S o my question is, doesn’t thi s indicate that the Fed’s facing a tougher time—you know, kind of going it alone, decoupling from the rest of the world—than perhaps you expected last fall wh en this first started to be an issue? CHAIR YELLEN. Well, it looks like, from incoming data pertaini ng to the first quarter, that real GDP growth has decline d somewhat below where it was f or the last several quarters of last year. And that’s really why t he Committee indicated that growth has moderated somewhat. There has been a slight downgrad ing of estimates of growth for this year. You mentioned the dollar. We noted that export gr owth has weakened. Probably th e strong dollar is one reason for that. On the other hand, the strength of the dollar also, in part, re flects the strength of the U.S. economy. The strength of the dolla r is also one factor that, a s I noted, is holding down import prices and, at least on a transit ory basis at this point, pushi ng inflation down. So, we are taking account of international developm ents, including prospects for growth in our trade partners, in making the forecast we have here. Nevertheless, it is important t o recognize that this is not a w eak forecast. Taking everything into account, we continue to project above-trend gro wth. We continue to project improvement in the labor market by the end of 2015. The centra l tendency of the participants is, they’re looking for an unemploym ent rate that will be down to 5 .0 to 5.2, which is consistent with their estimates of its l onger-run normal value. So, we do see considerable underlying strength in the U.S. econom y. And, in spite of what looks like a weaker first quarter, we are projecting good performance for the economy. MARTIN CRUTSINGER. Marty Cruts inger, Associated Press. The po licy statement today talks about one of the prere quisites you’ll need to start raising rates is to be “reasonably March 18, 2015 Chair Yellen’s P ress Conference FINAL  confident” that inflation—your i nflation target—will be met at 2 percent, but that is coming out at a time when you’ve lowere d your forecast on inflation, what— which I would think would make you less confident about it . What is it go ing to take to make you “reasonably confident” about inflation? CHAIR YELLEN. So, I don’t have a mechanical answer for you. T here is no single thing where I’d say, “We must s ee such-and-such in order to ach ieve that level of confidence.” We will be looking at a wi de array of data. Now, we’ve said that we also wan t to see continued improvement in the labor market. And a stronger labor market wit h less labor market slack is one factor that would tend to, certainly for me, increase my con fidence that as slack diminish es, that inflation will move up over time. Other things I will be looking at—of course, the in flation data, but as we said, we expect inflation to remain quite low because of the depressing influence of energy price declines and the dollar. But we will be looking at the inflation data c arefully to see if w e can interpret, for example, low levels of inflati on—if we see that, which we expec t, as reflecting those influences. We will be looking at wage growth. We have not seen wage growt h pick up. We may not see wage growth pick up, I woul dn’t say either that that is a precondition to raising rates. But if we did see wage growth pi ck up, that would be at least a symptom that inflation would likely move up over time. We’ll be watching inflation expe ctations. Survey measures have been stable; I expect that to continue, but we will be watching it carefully. And ma rket-based measures of inflation compensation have fallen. They’re low. If they were to move u p over time, that would probably serve to increase my confidence. March 18, 2015 Chair Yellen’s P ress Conference FINAL  But there are a wide range of t hings that we will be looking at , including further improvement in the labor market . So there’s no simple answer. This is a judgment that the Committee will have to make. JON HILSENRATH. Jon H ilsenrath from the Wall Street Journal . Chair Yellen, the famous dot plot that we always ta lk about showed that officials ’ expectations for where interest rates are going to end the y ear in 2015, ’16, and ’17 have come down fairly notably. I wonder if you could explain to us your analy sis of why those estimates ar e coming down. And, specifically, is it a reflecti on of—what’s changed? And is it a reflection of the changes in the Fed’s economic forecast or a cha nge in the way the Fed is react ing to the economy that it sees— its reaction function? CHAIR YELLEN. So, it’s always hard to know exactly why each pa rticipant has written down the forecast they have, but certainly there are changes in the assessments of the economy and forecasts for the economy tha t would point in the direction of downward adjustment in the funds rate path. For one thi ng, you do see meaningful downward adjustment in the inflation forecast, certainly for this year. In addition, importantly, a numbe r of participants have marked down their estimates of the normal longer-run unemploymen t rate. So that range has mov ed down noticeably from— previously it was 5.2 to 5.5, and i t’s now moved down to 5.0 to 5.2. And downward revisions to the longer-run normal unemployment rate in a way suggests that participants are seeing more slack in the economy now than the y previously did. So I think both of those things would point to downward revision in the funds rate path. SAM FLEMING. Sam Fleming from the Financial Times . The experience of some other central banks—notably Japa n, Sweden also—suggests that ti ghtening earl y when you’re at March 18, 2015 Chair Yellen’s P ress Conference FINAL  the zero lower bound can be a risky process—the ri sks of tighte ning early can dramatically outweigh the risks of leaving thi ngs a little l onger. I wonder if you could comment on that international experience and expl ain how that’s influencing the debate in the FOMC at the moment. CHAIR YELLEN. Well, when an econom y is operating at the so-cal led zero lower bound, there—it creates a situation w here there are asymmetric risks. It is possible, if the economy proves stronger than is expected, to r espond to that by tightening policy. If there are adverse shocks to demand that tend to push infla tion and econom ic performance in an adverse direction, it’s not possible to l ower rates. Of course, that’s a reason why, for a number of years, we engaged in active asset purch ase programs. So there is a si tuation there of asymmetric risks, and it does point in the direct ion of waiting longer to raise r ates. But I would say that this is a n influence that we—and a set of considerations—that we have long been aware of and have been taking into account, so t hat it’s not some thing that just comes into play now. It is a reas on that we have held our rate s at 0 to ¼ percent for, now, roughly six years. So, we are see ing an economy that’s growing above trend, the labor market is improving. I think some of the h eadwinds that have long been h olding the economy back are beginning to recede, which is a reason that the Committee wants to be able to evaluate incoming data and consider when it may be appropriate to finally raise r ates. But that is a consideration we have long taken into account. STEVE LIESMAN. Steve Liesma n, CNBC. I don’t hear, Chair Yelle n, any quantitative measures of what increasing conf idence is in inflation or headi ng back towards—or a further improvement in the job market, which is unusual for a Fed that not too long ago was providing us metrics on unemployment about when it would move with rates. Is it now policy to keep the March 18, 2015 Chair Yellen’s P ress Conference FINAL  market guessing? And is it thoug ht that you’d have better poli cy and economic outcomes from less certainty about the path of interest rates? And a kind of related question, if you will: Could you see raising rates while the C ommittee still judges that the risks are balanced? CHAIR YELLEN. So, in terms of cer tainty and providing metrics, we provided a metric or a threshold of 6½ percent severa l years ago and told market participants and the public that we wouldn’t consider it appropriate to raise rates as long as the unemployment rate was higher than that level, as long as inflati on was well contained. But our p olicy needs to be data dependent, and we need to respond to incom ing data and our assessment of i ncoming data in terms of where we think the economy is heading a nd how close we are to our obj ectives. And the markets—so, can we provide certainty? Of course we can ’t provide certainty because we’re not certain what th e data will look like and how the economy will evolve. And to achieve our objectives, we need t o watch the data, continually reformulate our best guesses—our forecasts of where the econo my is going—and respond appropriate ly. And we can’t provide certainty and shouldn’t provide c ertainty because economic deve lopments that will unfold are uncertain. And what market par ticipants should be doing is loo king at incoming data just as we are and forming their expectati ons for where policy will be goi ng and should be going just exactly as we will be doing by a ttempting to understand economi c developments as they unfold. And that’s—that is what we’re t rying to say in this statement, that that’s what we will be doing going forward. And we don’t want to—and don’t think it’s appro priate at this point—to provide calendar-based guidance. STEVE LIESMAN. Can I have the second part about the balance of risks—would you raise rates when risks are balanced? CHAIR YELLEN. The risks to what? March 18, 2015 Chair Yellen’s P ress Conference FINAL  STEVE LIESMAN. If risks are ba lanced, as they say in the state ment, could you be raising rates in that context? CHAIR YELLEN. Well, I guess we s aid the risks to the outlook a re balanced. And, I mean, certainly we could raise r ates in a situati on where the r isks are balanced. We need to see, as we have said, we want to see fu rther improvement in the labo r market, and we want to feel reasonably confident that the economy is on a trajectory where we will achieve our 2 percent inflation objective. BINYAMIN APPELBAUM. Binya Appelbaum, New York Times . There seems to be an awful lot riding on surveys of i nflation expectations, yet thos e surveys are an imprecise instrument; they don’t seem partic ularly sensiti ve to the types of changes in inflation that we have seen in recent years, they don’t seem to differentiate bet ween, say, 1.5 and 2—the expectations remain stable ev en through those changes. Could y ou talk a little bit about why the FOMC has confidence that those me asures are accurate reflection s of where inflation is likely to go and whether, you know, the concerns that you’ve articulated about market-based measures at all correspond to concerns that you may have about survey-based measures? CHAIR YELLEN. Well, survey-base d measures aren’t perfect. And the mean—often the mean or even the median of those measures does not line up very well with actual inflation, so they seem to be biased. Nev ertheless, they do seem to be us eful in predicting actual movements in inflation. And because we think inflation expecta tions are a determinant of price setting, we need to be looking at the best data that we can, ev en if it’s imperfect, in trying to gauge inflation expectations. And so we do look at survey meas ures. Now, the fact that survey measur es are stable, even if they are stable at levels consistent with inflation objectives that a central bank wants to achieve, that’s not a guarantee that inflation March 18, 2015 Chair Yellen’s P ress Conference FINAL  will, over time, move to be consis tent with those expectations. An example is Japan, I would give you, where for many years th e households and businesses ex pected positive inflation but there was a consistent undershoot . So, this isn’t a single met ric that is perf ect, but it’s one of many things we’d look at. We also look at measures of inf lation expectations based on mar ket differentials between nominal and real or TIPS yields . They’re also informative but can move around for reasons pertaining to liquidity in the Tr easury market and in the TIPS market, and also because of changing perceptions of inflati on risk. So, they’re not a pure read, either. And we want to look at both things and not take aw ay any simple morals. PETER BARNES. Peter Barnes, Fo x Business. Chair Yellen, I wan ted to check in again with you on whether or not you see or have any concerns about b ubbles out there in the economy, particularly the financi al markets—debt and equity mar kets. And I wanted to refer to your most recent Monetary Policy Report to Congress last month, in which you said “overall equity valuations by some conventional measures are somewhat hi gher than their historical levels . . . valuation metrics in some sectors continued to app ear stretched rela tive to historical norms.” In the same report last year, in July, the report spec ifically mentioned biotech and social media stocks as being “substantia lly”—let me see here—“substant ially stretched.” Do you still feel that way and can you co mment on bubbles and particularly t hese sectors? CHAIR YELLEN. Well, I don’t want to comment on those particula r sectors. You know, as we said in the report, overall measures of equity valu ations are on the high side but not outside of historical ranges. In s ome corporate debt markets, we do see evidence of unusually low spreads, and that’s what was referred to i n the report. March 18, 2015 Chair Yellen’s P ress Conference FINAL  More broadly, we do try to assess pot ential threats to financia l stability. And in addition to looking at asset valuations, w e also look at measures of cre dit growth, of the extent of leverage being used in the econom y and in the financial sector, and the extent of maturity transformation. And taking into account a broad range of metri cs that bear on financial stability, our overall assessment at this poi nt is that threats are modera te. JENNIFER LIBERTO. Jen Liberto, Politico . So, I want to switch ge ars a little bit and ask about some of the tension be tween the Fed and Congress late ly, with some lawmakers calling for more transparency and acc ountability measures. And I wante d to ask to what degree that there might be room for the Fed to consider some of these measu res, like maybe a rules-based approach like the Taylor rule, or some of these measures that w ould change up who has a voting seat on the FOMC. To what degree does that make it more diffic ult to accomplish your mission? CHAIR YELLEN. So, I believe the Federal Reserve is already one of the most transparent central banks of any around the globe. We provide an immense amount of information, both financial—about our balance sheet—and our mon etary policy operations. We have audited financial statem ents. We publish our balance shee t every week. If you want to know exactly what’s in the SOM A portfolio, it’s listed on the N ew York Fed website on a CUSIP-by-CUSIP basis. I have pre ss conferences. We issue minu tes. We have, you know, statements that we release right after meetings and transcripts within five years. So, if you put all that together, we are a transparent central bank. With respect to congressional cha nges that are under considerat ion that would politicize monetary policy by bring ing Congress in to make policy judgment s about, in real-time, on our monetary policy decisions. C ongress itself decided in 1978 tha t that was a bad t hing to do, that it would lead to poor economic perfor mance, and they carved out th is one area of policy reviews, March 18, 2015 Chair Yellen’s P ress Conference FINAL  of monetary policy decisionmaking, from GAO audits. The GAO lo oks at everything else that goes on within the Fed. And I thi nk that that is a central ban k best practice. The global experience shows th at giving central banks independe nce to make monetary policy decisions that th ey think are in the be st interest of th e country and consistent with their mandates leads to lower inflation and more stable macroeconomic outcomes. So, I feel very strongly about that, but we are accountable to Congress. Of co urse, we’re ready to provide information that Congress needs t o evaluate the Fed’s decisionm aking, in monetary policy and elsewhere. With respect to monetary policy rules, they can be useful, and I find them useful—and long have—as a kind of benchmark f or thinking about what might be the appropriate stance of policy. But to chain a central ba nk to follow a simple mathema tical rule that fai ls to take account of many things that are very im portant in making monetary polic y—for example, I was earlier asked about being against the z ero lower bound, which is an imp ortant special consideration— that would be a very foolis h thing to do, and I oppose it. With respect to proposals havi ng to do with voting and the stru cture of the Fed that you mentioned, a lot of ideas have been mentioned. I would say, fo r my part, I think the Federal Reserve works well. The syste m we have was put into place by C ongress decades ago. I don’t think it’s a system that’s br oken. Of course, Congress can rev isit the decisions it’s made about the structure of the Fed. The re were good reasons for making t he decisions that were made about how to structure voting and other things, but—and I don’t think the system is broken, I think it’s working well. So I don’t see a need for changes. But, of cour se, it’s up to Congress to review that. March 18, 2015 Chair Yellen’s P ress Conference FINAL  STEVEN MUFSON. I was wondering w hether you could quantify the effect that the stronger dollar has had on econom ic output so far this year; th e extent to which it’s sort of acted as its own rate increase; and w hat sort of obligation you feel, if any, to make life easier for the ECB, Bank of Japan, and the many emerging market countries that are struggling with some of the issues we struggle d with not that long ago. CHAIR YELLEN. So, with respect t o the impact of the dollar on the U.S. economy, I don’t have a quantitative estimat e to offer you, but I certainl y expect net exports to serve as a notable drag, this year, on the outlook. But, remember, we hav e to put that in context: There are a lot of things that affect t he U.S. outlook, and while that is serving as a drag on economic growth, overall the Committee continues to see sufficient stren gth—particularly in private spending—that we are expecti ng above-trend growth, even so. With respect to our neighbors, we look very carefully at what’s happening in the global environment. We realize that ou r own policies affect performan ce in the rest of the world, and that performance in other count ries has an influence on us, so we spend a good deal of time discussing global developments . It is important for us to keep our own house in order, to put in place the policy that’s consistent with the objectives that Con gress has given us, and I think a strong U.S. economy certainly i s something that is good for oth er countries as well. We have pledged to communicate as clearly as we can about monetary poli cy, and I am trying to do that, and will continue to do so. NANCY MARSHALL-GENZER . Nancy Marshall-Genzer with Marketplace. We talked about the risk of tighten ing too early. What about the risk of waiting too long, especially since it can take a while for Fe d actions to work their way thr ough the economy? March 18, 2015 Chair Yellen’s P ress Conference FINAL  CHAIR YELLEN. Well, I agree with that. Many, many studies over decades and decades have showed that there are lags in the way monetary pol icy affects the economy, and, therefore, monetary policy does have to be forward looking. Th at’s why we spend so much time preparing forecasts and discussi ng them, and we want to put in place a policy that will be appropriate for where the econom y is heading. That’s—that is, you know, a reason that many of my colleagues—most of my colleag ues—are anticipating that it wi ll be appropriate to begin to tighten policy sometime this year . In spite of the fact that t hey are projecting tha t inflation will be low, they’re looking forwar d and they see that, by the end o f 2016 or 2017, with the labor market recovering, and assuming tha t inflation expectations rem ain stable and transitory influences no longer affecting inflation, they see inflation he ading back to our 2 percent objective. So just as we don’t wa nt to be premature in tighten ing policy and aborting a recovery that we have worked long and hard to proceed as far as it has, we also don’t want to be behind the curve in beginning to tighten given those lags. CRAIG TORRES. Madame Chair, I’d like to preface this by saying , I do believe you stand for accountability. And—so, recently, a bunch of us, we’ re in a room over there, there was a police guard outside, and your sta ff had taken our cell phone s, and they controlle d the Internet in the room—all this to guard the security of the FOMC statemen t. If one of us had leaked it, we would lose our jobs. Surely the re would be a prosecution, and my friends here in the press would certainly have a ba nner day with that story. There was a leak in the FOMC . We don’t know what happened. I’ ve asked, I can’t get an answer. And now Congress is asking. Both par ties want to k now. I’m not going to ask about the IG’s probe—I understand that’ s an active case now, suddenly , after two years of just sitting there. But I would like to as k what you’ve found at the Board. You weren’t Chairman then, you March 18, 2015 Chair Yellen’s P ress Conference FINAL  were Vice Chair, I believe. S o what answers do you have, and a re you going to respond to Congress? CHAIR YELLEN. So, let me say tha t the Committee and I, persona lly, take very seriously our responsibility to s afeguard confidential informat ion. We have a set of policies and procedures that are in place that we’re to follow if we believe that there have been leaks of confidential information. And thi s is something that doesn’t o ccur very often, but if it does occur, we follow those procedures. It has been reported that o ur Inspector General is engaged in a review at this time of thi s matter, and in light of that ongo ing review, I’m not going to get into details, but let me just say tha t we welcome that review and ar e looking forward to its conclusions. With respect to C ongress, congressional inquiries —we have arranged to brief members of Congress who’ve ask ed about this, and we’ll certainl y cooperate in trying to provide them the information that they seek. JOHN HELTMAN. Madame Chair, thanks for taking my question. Th e banking sector has clearly improved since the cr isis in terms of capital reten tion, but there’s also seemingly a number of scandals involving for ex manipulation, of course LIBO R. Do you think that the culture at the banks is wher e it ought to be? And, if not, wha t is the Fed going to do to improve it, and when? CHAIR YELLEN. Well, it’s certai nly been—I mean, it’s certainly been very disappointing to see what have been some really brazen violatio ns of the law, and we absolutely expect the banks that we superv ise to comply with the law and t o have in place controls that ensure compliance in organiza tions. And while changing the cul ture of organizations is not something that we can achieve through supervision, we will make sure that the banks that we supervise have appropriate comp liance regimes in place. And to the extent that compensation March 18, 2015 Chair Yellen’s P ress Conference FINAL  schemes might be incenting such b ehavior that inappropriately r ewards risk-taking, that’s something that was—we will, you know, look for in our supervisi on as well. JOHN HELTMAN. I have a follow-up. When you introduced—you int roduced a compensation rule in 2011. Wh en do you think we might see some movement on that—on that rule? CHAIR YELLEN. Well, the agencies— the agencies are working join tly to bring out a rule on this, but we do have supe rvisory policies in place conc erning the structure of incentive pay and compensation, and our superv ision covers that topic now . And we have seen, I think, meaningful changes already in the structure of compensation and banking organizations to diminish ways in which it might incent risk-taking. PEDRO DA COSTA. Pedro da Costa with Dow Jones Newswires. I gu ess I have two follow-ups, one with regard to Cra ig’s question. So, before th e IG’s investigation, according to Republican Congressman Hensarlin g’s letter to your office, he s ays that, “It is my understanding that although the Federal Reserve ’s General Counsel was initial ly involved in this investigation, the inquiry was dropped at the r equest of several members of th e FOMC.” Now, that predates the IG. I want to know if you coul d tell us who are these memb ers of the FOMC who struck down this investigation? And doe sn’t not revealing these facts kind of go directly against the sort of transparency and account ability that you’re trying to b ring to the central bank? CHAIR YELLEN. That is an allega tion that I don’t believe has a ny basis in fact. I’m not going to go into the details, but I don’t know where that piece of information could possibly have come from. PEDRO DA COSTA. If I could follow up on his question. I think when you get asked about financial crimes and t he public hears you talk about comp liance, you get a sense that March 18, 2015 Chair Yellen’s P ress Conference FINAL  there’s not enough enforcement i nvolved in these actions, and t hat it’s merely a case of kind of trying to achieve settlements a fter the fact. Is there a sense in the regulatory community that financial crimes need to be punished sort of more forcefully in order for them to be—for there to be an actual deterrent agai nst unethical behavior? CHAIR YELLEN. So, the—you’re tal king about within banking orga nizations? So, the focus of regulators—the banki ng regulators—is safety and soundn ess, and what we want to see is changes made as rapidly as pos sible that will eliminate prac tices that are unsafe and unsound. We can’t—only the Justice Depart ment can bring criminal action, and they have taken up cases where they think that that’s app ropriate. In some situations, when we are able to identify individuals who were responsib le for misdeeds, we can put in pl ace prohibitions that bar them from participating in banking, a nd we have done so and will con tinue to do so. STEVE BECKNER. Steve Beckner of MNI. Good afternoon, Madame C hair. The FOMC said last September that it will wait ‘til after the first rate hike to stop or to discontinue reinvesting proceeds of its MBS holdings and stop rolling over maturing Treasurie s. What is the FOMC’s current thinking about how long after liftoff you should wait to stop reinvestments and rollovers? And, given the very lar ge amounts of Treasuries mat uring next year, would it make sense for the FOMC to vary the pace of runoff that it allows? CHAIR YELLEN. So, we issued in Se ptember a set of normalizatio n principles, and, as you noted, the Committee indicated t hat we will eventually ceas e reinvestments or diminish the pace of reinvestments as a way of gradually reducing the size o f our portfolio over time. We said we would do that when econom ic conditions were appropriate after we begin raising rates, because we want changes in the—our target range for the federal funds rate to be the main tool by which we shift the stance of monetary policy. We’ve not made any deci sion at this point March 18, 2015 Chair Yellen’s P ress Conference FINAL  about how long it will be, once we b egin to raise rates, before we reduce or cease reinvestment. We will see how things go, and the Committee will revisit that and make a decision at a later time. You also indicated that we have a substantial quantity of Treas uries that will roll off our balance sheet over the next sev eral years. That’s true, and th at will—I think, over the next two years, almost $800 billion will matu re—and that they will be sh ort-term, obviously, Treasuries at that point, and that’s a way in whi ch we anticipate diminishing the size of our portfolio. STEVE BECKNER. Can I follow up, please? Some people have sugg ested that you might need to manage those runoffs a little more granularly, if that’s a word, perhaps pursue a different track for Treasur ies versus MBS or, you know, at give n quarters when you have very large amounts maturing, and there might be a spike in long-term interest rates, that maybe you would vary the rate of runoff. I s that—any consideration given to that? CHAIR YELLEN. That’s something for which we’ve made no plans, and I don’t really have anything for you on that. GREG ROBB. Greg Robb from Mark etWatch. We hear that productiv ity takes a long time before you can understand it, b ut it’s been very low in th is cycle. What does that mean for Fed policy? CHAIR YELLEN. Well, I agree, it has been very low—it’s been di sappointingly low. A positive aspect of what is fundamentally a disappointment is th at the labor market has improved more rapidly than might have been expected given the pace of ec onomic growth. So the unemployment rate has come down m ore rapidly than I would have expected, and the labor market has improved more rapidly than I would have expected. W e have written down our estimates of potential output . In the long run, it is a disapp ointing factor about the ultimate March 18, 2015 Chair Yellen’s P ress Conference FINAL  prospects for the U.S. econom y if it continues. I would expect it to pick up, and as you can see from the longer-run growth projections, most FOMC participants believe it will pick up above current levels. But it means it’s something that would, if it persists, retard living standards and would likely retard real wage gr owth and improvement in living standards for ordinary households. PETER COOK. Peter Cook of Bloombe rg Television. Madame Chair, one clarification, if I could, logistically, and t hen a question about Congress, a follow-up. First of all, you’ve been asked this before, I just want t o see if we can clarify. When you decide to start raising interest rates, could that decision ha ppen at a meeting in which you—it’ s not followed by a press conference? And, on my congressi onal question, I would like to get your reaction to your—the treatment you received up on Capito l Hill the other day. It di dn’t look like a very pleasant experience, certainly in front of the House, at least at moment s. I wondered if you have concerns about that. Has the relations hip between the Fed and Congress deteriorated to a point that it causes you concern? What, if anything, can you do about it as well? CHAIR YELLEN. So let me start w ith the press conferences. I s aid this previously, and let me reiterate it, that ever y meeting that the Federal Open M arket Committee has is a live meeting at which we could make a decision. Clearly, if we deci ded for the first time to raise the federal funds rate, it is som ething—I think it would be appropr iate to answer questions and explain in more detail. We ha ve long had the capacity to call a press conference after a meeting that we would hold by teleconfer ence—by conference call—and tha t’s a capacity that was used on a number of occasions by my predecessor during the financial crisis. It is something that remains a capacity we have and w ould expect to use if it were n ecessary. March 18, 2015 Chair Yellen’s P ress Conference FINAL  On the second part of your question , with respect to testimony, you know, it’s very important for the Federal Reser ve to be accountable to Congress . We have a wide range of responsibilities, and it’s entirely appropr iate for me to testi fy and be quizzed on a range of topics by members of Congress. I—you know , I think I need to be ready to answer questions on any aspect of Federal Reserve behavi or, and that’s an important pri nciple.