June 17, 2015 Chair Yellen’s Press Conference FINAL  Transcript of Chair Yellen’s Press Conference June 17, 2015 CHAIR YELLEN. Good afternoon. Toda y the Federal Open Market C ommittee reaffirmed the current 0 to ¼ perc ent target range for the fede ral funds rate. Since the Committee last met in April, the pace of job gains has picked u p and labor market conditions have improved somewhat further . Inflation has c ontinued to run below our longer-run objective, but some of the downward pressure on inflation re sulting from e arlier sharp declines in energy prices is abating. The Committee continues to judge that the f irst increase in the federal funds rate will be appropriate when it has seen further improvement i n the labor market and is reasonably confident that infla tion will move back to its 2 per cent objective over the medium term. At our meeting that ended today, the Committee concluded that these conditions have not yet been achieved. It remains th e case that the Committee will determine the timing of the initial increase in the federal funds r ate on a meeting-by-meeting basi s, depending on its assessment of incoming economic information and its implications for the econ omic outlook. Let me emphasize that the importance of the initial increase should no t be overstated: The stance of monetary policy will likely remain highly accommodative for qui te some time after the initial increase in the federal funds rat e in order to s upport continue d progress toward our objectives of maximum employment and 2 percent inflation. I will come back t o today’s policy decision in a few moments, but first I would lik e to review recent economic d evelopments and the outlook. The U.S. economy hit a soft patc h earlier this year; real gross domestic product looks to have changed little in the fir st quarter. Growth in household spending slowed, business fixed investment edged down, and net export s were a substantial drag on growth. Part of this weakness was likely the result of transitory factors. Despite the soft first quarter, the fundamentals underlying househol d spending appear favorable, an d consumer sentiment remains June 17, 2015 Chair Yellen’s Press Conference FINAL  solid. Looking ahead, the Committee still expects a moderate p ace of GDP growth, with continuing job gains and lower energy prices supporting househo ld spending. The labor market data so far this year have shown further progr ess toward our objective of maximum employment, although a t a slower pace than late last year. Over the past three months, job gains have averaged about 210,000 per month, down f rom an average pace of 280,000 per month over the second hal f of last year, but still well above the pace consistent with trend labor force growth. Alt hough the unemployment rate, at 5 .5 percent in May, was unchanged from the latest readi ng available at the time of our April meeting, the labor force participation rate edged up. A broader measure of unemployment that includes individuals who want and are available to wor k but have not actively searched r ecently and people who are working part time but would rather work full time has continued to improve. But it seems likely that some cyclical weakness in the labor market remains: The p articipation rate remains below most estimates of its underlyi ng trend, involuntary part-time e mployment remains elevated, and wage growth remains relat ively subdued. So, although progress clearly has been achieved, room for further improvement remains. Inflation has continued to r un below our longer-run objective, in part reflecting lower energy prices. Declines in import prices have also restrained inflation. However, energy prices appear to have stabilized recen tly. My colleagues and I contin ue to expect that as the effects of these transitory factors dissipa te and as the labor market impr oves further, inflation will gradually move back toward our 2 p ercent objective over the med ium term. Market-based measures of inflation compensa tion remain low, though they have risen some from their levels earlier this year, and survey-ba sed measures of longer-term inf lation expectations have remained stable. The Committee will continue to monitor inflation devel opments carefully. June 17, 2015 Chair Yellen’s Press Conference FINAL  This assessment of the outlook is reflected in the individual e conomic projections submitted for this meeting by FOMC participants. As always, ea ch participant’s projections are conditioned on his or her own view of appropriate monetary poli cy. For economic growth, participants reduced their proj ections for this year, in line w ith the disappointing data for the first quarter. The central tendency of the growth projections for 20 15 is now 1.8 to 2.0 percent, down a little more than ½ percentage po int from the March projection s. The central tendency rises to 2.4 to 2.7 percent next year, somewhat above estimates of the l onger-run growth rate. The unemployment rate projections for this year are a little higher than in March. At the end of this year, the central tendency for t he unemployment rate stands at 5.2 to 5.3 percent, a bit above participants’ estimates of the longer-run normal unemployment r ate. Committee participants generally see the unemployment ra te declining a little further over the course of 2016 and 2017. Finally, FOMC participants projec t inflation to be quite low th is year, largely reflecting lower energy and non-energy import prices . The central tendency of t he inflation projections for this year is below 1 percent, unchanged since March. As the transit ory factors holding down inflation abate, the central tendency rises to 1.6 to 1.9 perce nt next year and to 1.9 to 2.0 percent in 2017. Returning to monetary policy, as I noted, the Committee reaffir med its view that the current 0 to ¼ percent target ra nge for the federal funds rate remains appropriate. As we said in our statement, the decision to rai se the target range will depe nd on our assessment of realized and expected progress toward our o bjectives of maximum employme nt and 2 percent inflation. We continue to base that assessm ent on a wide range of informat ion, including measures of labor market conditions, indicators of inflation pressures and inflat ion expectations, and readings on financial and international de velopments. And we continue to a nticipate that it will be June 17, 2015 Chair Yellen’s Press Conference FINAL  appropriate to raise the target range for the federal funds rat e when the Committee has seen further improvement in the labor market and is reasonably confi dent that inflation will move back to its 2 percent objectiv e over the medium term. On both of these fronts, as I not ed, we have seen some progress . Even so, the Committee judged that economic conditions do not yet warrant an increase in the federal funds rate. While the Committee views the disappoi nting economic performance in t he first quarter as largely transitory, my colleagues and I would like to see more decisive evidence that a moderate pace of economic growth will be sustained, so that conditions in the la bor market will continue to improve and inflation will move back to 2 percent. Once we begin to remove policy acc ommodation, we continue to ex pect that—as we say in our statement—“even after emp loyment and inflation are near mandate-consistent levels, economic conditions may, for some time, warrant keeping the tar get federal funds rate below levels the Committee views as normal in the longer run.” In other words, alt hough policy will be data dependent, economic conditions are currently anticipated t o evolve in a manner that will warrant only gradual increases in the target federal funds rate . Compared with the projections mad e in March, most FOMC particip ants lowered somewhat their paths for the fede ral funds rate, consistent wit h the revisions made to the projections for GDP growth and the unemployment rate. The medi an projection for the federal funds rate continues to point to a first increase later this ye ar, with the rate rising to about 1¾ percent in late 2016 and 2¾ pe rcent in late 2017. In 2016 a nd 2017, the median path is about ¼ percentage point below that pr ojected in March. The median p rojected rate in 2017 remains below the 3¾ percent or so projec ted by most FOMC participants as the longer-run value of the federal funds rate even though the central tendency of the unem ployment rate by that time is June 17, 2015 Chair Yellen’s Press Conference FINAL  slightly below its estimated l onger-run value and the central t endency for inflati on is close to our 2 percent objective. Participant s provided a number of explana tions for the federal funds rate running below its normal longer-run l evel at that time. These included, in particular, the residual effects of the financial crisis , which are likely to continue t o constrain spending and credit availability for some time. I would like to emphasize that the forecasts of the appropriate path of the federal funds rate are conditional on participants’ individual projections of the most likely outcomes for economic growth, employment, inflation, and other factors. But our actual policy decisions over time will depend on evolving economic conditions. Accordingly, if the expansion proves to be more vigorous than currently an ticipated and inflation moves hi gher than expected, then the appropriate path would likely fo llow a steeper a nd higher traje ctory; conversely, if conditions were to prove weaker, then the a ppropriate tra jectory would be lower and less steep. Finally, the Committee will continue its policy of reinvesting proceeds from maturing Treasury securities a nd principal payments from agency debt and mortgage-backed securities. The Committee’s sizable holdings of longer-term securities shou ld help maintain accommodative financial conditions and promot e further progress toward our ob jectives. Thank you. I’ll be happy to take your questions. YLAN MUI. Hi, Ylan Mui from the Washington Post . As you mentioned, almost all of the FOMC participants believe that the first rate hike will com e this year. But two of your colleagues believe that 2016 is th e appropriate time, the IMF h as called on 2016 as the appropriate time for liftoff as well, and markets seems to plac e a greater probability of liftoff in January than they do in September. So what are—what is the mis understanding here? What is—what do they have wrong, and why do you think that waiting u ntil 2016 is a mistake? June 17, 2015 Chair Yellen’s Press Conference FINAL  CHAIR YELLEN. Well, there are obviously a range of opinions, b oth in the market and among Committee members, at this time on what the appropriate s tance of policy is likely to be later this year and next year. But , importantly, the—when the people write down their dots in the SEP, they’re making forecasts a bout what unfolding data is like ly to show. But the participants will all be—their views will evolve with unfolding data. For all of us, the appropri ate policy decision is going to be d ata dependent, and all of us will be looking at incoming data . And our opinions about the a ppropriate timing of normalization are likely to shi ft as we look at how the data ev olves. Differences in the appropriate assessments of the appropriate stance of policy—in addition to reflecting different views on the outlook, there are a s et of risks that all of us n eed to weigh in judging on the— judging the appropriate time of t he beginning of normalization. On the one hand, waiting too long to begin normalization can r isk significan tly overshooting our inflation objective given the lags in the operation of mone tary policy. And, on the other ha nd, beginning too early could risk derailing a recovery that we ha ve worked for a very long time t o try to achieve. And so we’re trying to assess those risks. But I want to emphasize, sometimes too much attention is placed on the timing of the first increase in the federal funds rate. And what should matt er to market participants is the entire trajectory, the entire expected trajectory of policy. A nd, again, while our actual policy decisions will have to evolve in light of what really does happ en in the economy, the Committee, as you can see by the SEP projections , currently anticipates th at conditions will evolve in the economy in a manner that will make it appropriate to raise the federal funds rate gradually over time. June 17, 2015 Chair Yellen’s Press Conference FINAL  STEVE LIESMAN. Madam Chair, I wonder if you might characterize the progress made towards fulfilling the Fed’s tw o criteria. Are you somewhat mo re confident, not confident at all that you’re moving towards 2 percen t? Has there been a lot of improvement in the labor market? Some improvement? And how shoul d we judge when those two crite ria have been fulfilled? CHAIR YELLEN. Well, it’ s a judgment that the Committee is—will have to make, and, as I’ve said previously and as we ’ve said in the statement, it will depend on a wide range of data and not on any simple indicators . So I can’t provide you—it wo uld be wrong for me to provide you a roadmap that said something as simple as, if the unemploy ment rate declines to X, that then the labor market will ha ve improved enough for us to begin to raise policy. Obviously, we have to look at the pace of job creation. We hav e to look at what’s happening to labor force particip ation, to part-time employment for economic reasons, to job openings, to the pace of quits, t o wage inflation, and other in dicators of the state of the labor market. I did say when we agreed that labor market slack has d iminished to some extent in the intermeeting period, and, clearl y, over a longer span of time, over the last several years, obviously we’ve made considerab le progress in moving toward our goal of maximum employment. So, in spite of the f act that there is some progre ss on that front, the Committee wants to see some further progre ss before feeling that it will be appropriate to raise rates. On inflation, again, there has b een some progress, in the sense energy prices appear to have stabilized. Now, inflati on is going to—overall inflation is likely to run at a low level for a substantial period of time. The big declines in energy prices came toward the end of last year and the beginning of this year , and they’re not going to wash o ut of the inflation data until late in this year. But the fact that en ergy prices have stabilized mea ns that the pressure from that source is diminishing. June 17, 2015 Chair Yellen’s Press Conference FINAL  In addition, the dollar appears to have largel y stabilized. An d, with respect to core inflation, it has been runni ng under our 2 percent objective, b ut declining import prices have been reducing that pressure. I be lieve that as the labor marke t continues to improve and as our confidence in that forecast rise s, at least for me, my confiden ce will also rise that inflation will move back up toward 2 percent. I e xpect that to, over time, pu t upward pressure on core inflation. JON HILSENRATH. Thank you, Chair Y ellen. Jon Hilsenrath from the Wall Street Journal. Two questions if I may. First , I wanted to ask you about a c omment that New York Fed President William Dudley made recently that, in retrospect, the Fed should have raised interest rates more aggre ssively during the 2004–2006 cycle. T his was in a footnote to a speech he gave. I wonder if you agree with that and whether there are any lessons from the 2004–2006 cycle that should be applied t oday. And, second, relating to C ongress, the Fed has resisted past efforts in Congress to pass measur es like an “Audit the Fed” bi ll or a measure to subject the Fed to a policy rule. There’s now a Shelby bill out there. I wond er if there’s anything in that that you can accept and, more broadl y, whether there’s anything you could point to that Congress can do to make the Fed a more effective institution and a more acco untable institution. Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN. Okay, so on the f irst question you asked about t he 2004–06 rate increase cycle. Throughout that period, the Fed indicated that rates would rise at a measured pace, and that turned out to be, I believe, 17 meetings, with 2 5 basis point increases at each meeting. As I’ve emphasized, previously, we have—absolutely do not expect to follow any mechanical 25 basis points a meeting, 25 basis point every othe r meeting, no plan to follow any type of mechanical approach to r aising the federal funds rate. We will evaluate incoming conditions and move in the manner that we regard as appropriate . So that’s one lesson. You June 17, 2015 Chair Yellen’s Press Conference FINAL  know, conceivably, I think, with t he benefit of hindsight, it m ight have been better to raise rates more rapidly or more duri ng the 2004–06 cycle. You know, I’m n ot certain of that judgment, but I think there’s a case to be made. You asked about Audit the Fed and the Shelby bill. The Shelby bill has a title in it that addresses a number of issues pertaining to the Fed. I suppose I would ask, what exactly is the problem? We place high priorit y on being an accountable and tr ansparent central bank, and I think that if you compare the t ransparency of monetary policy d ecisions in the Federal Reserve with other central banks, we are one of the most transparent ce ntral banks in terms of the information that we provide to t he public in a whole variety of ways. To my mind, the Fed is accountable, and we work well as an institution. I’m not certa in what the problem is that needs to be addressed. SAM FLEMING. Thanks very much. Sam Fleming from the Financial Times. First question is also referencing som ething that Bill Dudley said re cently, which is to do with the use of the balance sheet in tight ening monetary policy. He suggest ed that the short rates should be hiked some way from the zero lo wer bound before the Fed continu es—considers ending reinvestments. I wondered if you could give a little bit more clarity on how the Fed intends to approach the issue of ending rei nvestments on its balance sheet . Would you, for instance, see any argument for tapering the e nd to reinvestments to smooth th e profile of maturities in the portfolio? The second question is really on this point of “gra dual”—you’ve used this term today in the opening statement. Is the term “gradual” on its way to becoming official guidance from the Fed? Is this something we should start to expect to see po pping up in official FOMC statements in future? Thanks. June 17, 2015 Chair Yellen’s Press Conference FINAL  CHAIR YELLEN. So let me start w ith the balance sheet and our r einvestment policy. We issued a normalization state ment giving principles of normal izing policy, and what we said at that time is that we expected to reduce or cease reinvestmen t at some time after we had begun the process of normalizing polic y by raising our target for the federal funds rate. We said the timing of that would depend on economic and financial condition s, and the Committee has really not made any further decisions about how it’s going to go about doing that, so President Dudley was expressing his own personal po int of view. But this is a m atter that the Committee has not yet decided, and I can’t provide any further detail. It’s obvi ously something we will be thinking about. Let’s see, you asked about “grad ual.” So, in a sense, we alrea dy have a statement. The last paragraph of the Federal Ope n Market Committee statement s ays: “The Committee currently anticipates that, eve n after employment and inflation are near mandate-consistent levels, economic conditions may, for some time, warrant keeping the target federal funds rate below levels the Committee view s as normal in the longer run.” That’s kind of a mouthful. It’s a long sentence, but I think the s pirit of that sentence is con sistent with my use of the word “gradual,” and it is consistent with what you see in the Summar y of Economic Projections. Participants are projecting—obvious ly there is a lot of uncerta inty, but they’re projecting increases that average ar ound 100 basis points per year. Now, that’s not a promise, it’s conditional on their economic forecasts, and those forecasts ma y prove to be wrong and may change. But at this time, the assessmen t that participants have of the economy suggest to them that the appropriate pace of normalization to keep the economy on track to meet our objectives will be gradual, in that sense. June 17, 2015 Chair Yellen’s Press Conference FINAL  PETER COOK. Peter Cook with Bloom berg Television. Madam Chair , if I could, just given your discussions over the past two days with your colleag ues, the state of the economy right now, the improvements you’ve seen, do you think it’s stil l likely that we’ll see a rate increase this year? And to fo llow on that, something Ylan ment ioned—that is, the comment from the IMF recently, earlier t his month, and the encouragemen t you got from the IMF to hold off on raising rates until next ye ar. Specifically, they said— your colleague Madam Lagarde mentioned specifically the risk— that even though there’s a risk of slight inflation by doing that, that there was concern that a ra te hike could trigger market vo latility, with fin ancial stability consequences that go well beyond the U.S. borders. How do you respond to those concerns? Are you factoring in that interna tional context to your decisio nmaking? And was it appropriate for the IMF to make those kinds of specific recommendations? CHAIR YELLEN. Okay. So your first qu estion was about a rate i ncrease this year. You know, again, the Committee tries to give an indication in the S ummary of Economic Projections about how economic conditions will unfold, their best projectio ns of that and what the appropriate policy will be give n in light of those expectations . And, clearly, most participants are anticipating that a rate increase this year will be appropr iate. Now, that assumes, as you can s ee, that they’re expecting a pic kup in growth in the second half of this year and furth er improvement in labor marke t conditions. And we will all be—we will be making decisions however that depend on the actua l data that we see in the months ahead. So, certainly, we could see data in the months a head that will justify the expectations that you see in the so-called dot plot. But, agai n, the important point is, no decision has been made by the Committee about what the right timing is o f an increase. It will depend on June 17, 2015 Chair Yellen’s Press Conference FINAL  unfolding data in the months ah ead. But, certainly, an increas e this year is possible. We could certainly see data that would justify that. In terms the IMF guidance, you know , I believe the IMF plays a very useful role by undertaking reviews of the econom ic policies of all of its memb ers. Obviously, there is a range of opinion among outside observers a nd market participants as w ell as among the Committee’s participants, as you can see in the SEP, about how economic con ditions are likely to unfold and, consequently, the appropriate ti ming of an initial rate hike. I think, however, we all agree, and the IMF agrees, that policies should be data dependent, and the Committee is always doing its best to assess the implicati ons of incoming data. I would poin t out that we have had incoming data since that report was writt en. But, again, I want to emph asize—and I think the IMF would agree with this—that the impor tance of the timing of a first de cision to raise rates is something that should not be overb lown, whether it’s September or Decembe r or March—what matters is the entire path of rates. And, as I’ve said, the Committee ant icipates economic conditions that would call for a gradual evolut ion of the fed funds rate toward normalization. With respect to international sp illovers, this is something tha t we have been long attentive to. Obviously, we have to put in pl ace a policy that is approp riate to evolving conditions in the U.S. economy, but we can’t promise that there will not be volat ility when we make a decision to raise rates. What we can do is to do our very best to communic ate clearly about our policy and our expectations to avoid any type of needless misunderstanding of our policy that could create volatility in the market and potential spillovers as well to em erging markets, and I have been trying to do that now for some ti me. I’ve been doing my best t o make good on that pledge. MARTIN CRUTSINGER. Marty Crutsi nger with the Associated Press. You just talked about the fact that you can’t prom ise that there won’t be volat ility in the markets. There seem to June 17, 2015 Chair Yellen’s Press Conference FINAL  be two schools of thought. One is that the Fed learned from th e mistakes made in the—2013 with the taper tantrum, and tha t you’re going to telegraph this so well that that will limit it. And the more pessimistic school of thought seems to be that when yo u do start raising rates, they’ve been low for so long that it’s goi ng to be—make the taper tantr um seem mild by comparison. Which camp are you falling in on that? CHAIR YELLEN. I think our experien ce suggests that it’s hard t o have great confidence in predicting what the market reaction will be to Fed decisions , and there have been surprises in the past. I don’t think the Comm ittee anticipated that its dec ision would cause the taper tantrum. And all I can say is that uncerta inty in the markets at this po int about long-term rates doesn’t appear to be unusually high, and w e can only do what is in our power to attempt to minimize needless volatility that could have repercussions for other cou ntries or for financial stability more generally, and that is to attempt to communicate as clearly as we can about our policy decisions, what they will depend on, and what we are looking at. We will be responding to incoming data. We’ve tried to make th at clear. And I think it’s clear that the market is als o responding to incoming data, and you can see that in daily market reactions to surprises in t he economic data. And, of course, n one of us can quite forecast what incoming data will be. BINYAMIN APPELBAUM. Your latest economic projections show that you expect the unemployment rate—or, many officials expect the unemployment ra te—to fall more slowly this year and then to fall, by impli cation, more quickly next year. Could you talk about what has changed in your assessment of the labor market and how that inf luences the path of policy? CHAIR YELLEN. So we are—productiv ity growth has been—is a fact or that affects the pace of improvement in the labor market. Productivity growth h as been extremely slow for the June 17, 2015 Chair Yellen’s Press Conference FINAL  last couple of years, and I think, in part, the pace of improve ment in the labor market that we’re projecting reflects th e notion that there’s likely to be some p ickup in the pace of productivity growth. Obviously, that’s someth ing that’s quite uncertain, an d it’s conceivable that if productivity growth disappoints— something I hope that we won’t see, because that has very negative implications for living standards—we could conceivably see faster improvement in the labor market. But, in addition, there are other margins of slack that don’t s how up in the unemployment rate. Labor force participation that has, at least, is—appears to be depressed, at least to some extent, because of cyclical wea kness, and the fact that labor f orce participation rate has remained roughly stable for the last year or so when there’s an underlyi ng downward trend suggests that some slack is being taken up by, in a sense, improved or dimini shed cyclical impact on labor force participation. I expect t hat to continue, and I would ex pect also to see some improvement in the degree of part-time employ ment that’s for economic reaso ns. JONATHAN SPICER. Jonathan Spi cer with Reuters. To your point, Madam Chair, on needing more decisive evidence i n order to initiate the first r ate hike, how close do you feel the economy is to full capacity now ? And given that, you know, emp loyer costs and monthly wages are at a pace that’s at a six-y ear high now, what is the risk—o r, how does the risk change that inflation could strengthen qui cker than you’re expecting? CHAIR YELLEN. So the Committee es timates that the longer-run n ormal level of the unemployment rate is 5.0 to 5.2. A t 5.5 percent, where we have an unemployment rate that still exceeds the Committee’s best attempts to estimate what is a nor mal unemployment rate for this economy, and, as I mentioned, the re appear to be unusually larg e elements of slack over and above that in the form of somewha t still-depressed labor force participation and part-time work June 17, 2015 Chair Yellen’s Press Conference FINAL  for economic reasons. So I think it ’s fair to say that most me mbers, most participants on the Committee, wouldn’t judge yet—al though some might—that most wou ldn’t judge us to be at, quote, “maximum employment.” Wage increases are still running a t a low level, but there have been some tentative signs that wage growth is picking up. W e have seen an increase in th e growth rate of the employment cost index and a mild uptick in t he growth of average hourly ea rnings. I would call these tentative signs of stronger wag e growth. I think it’s not yet definitive, but that is a hopeful sign. Still, however, inflation—not onl y headline, but, stripping out food and energy underlying inflation, core inflat ion—is still running below the Committee’s objective. So I think we need to see additional strength in the labor market and the economy moving somewhat closer to capacity—the output gap shrin king—in order to have confidenc e that inflation will move back up to 2 percent, but we have made some progress. GREG ROBB. Thank you. Greg Robb fro m MarketWatch. I’d like t o turn your attention to the housing market for a question. Both rents and house prices have been rising rapidly recently, squeezing Ame ricans on both sides. How comfo rtable are you with this, and does it impact monetary policy? Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN. Well, I mean, the house—the increase in house pr ices is restoring wealth of many households who have t hat as their major asset. It is an important part of the wealth of American household—the A merican household sector. An d for all of the households that were underwater, those house price increases are improving their financial condition, although, of course, at the same time, it’s making housing less affordable for those who look to buy. June 17, 2015 Chair Yellen’s Press Conference FINAL  At the same time, housing overall, given the low levels—still l ow level of mortgage rates, remains quite affordable. I thi nk credit availability remains quite constrained for mortgages. Anyone who doesn’t have a pristine credit rating is—finds it ve ry difficult at th is point to qualify for a mortgage, and I think we’re seeing quite a bit of relucta nce, given the job market and given what the history of what’s happened to house prices, of young p eople to want to buy homes. We’ve seen them delay marriage and wanting to have the flexibil ity to move. So the demand for multifamily housing to rent is very high, and rent prices are m oving up, I think, because of that. JEREMY TORDJMAN. Hi, Jeremy To rdjman with Agence France-Presse . I have a question on Europe. As you know, the re is a growing political gridlock on Greece, and the scenario of a “Grexit” is getting every day more likely. So ho w concerned are you by these developments? Do you feel it coul d impact the global and the U .S. economy, and could it influence in anywhere—in any way, sorry, when you will decide t o increase the interest rates? CHAIR YELLEN. Well I—unfortunate ly, Greece and its creditors a re faced with very difficult and consequential de cisions at this point and in the days ahead, and my hope is that they will continue to work together to try to find a solution to the , you know, current difficulties and impasse. Obviously, European lead ers place great value on pres erving European monetary, economic, and political integrati on, and the Greek people have made clear that it’s important to them to remain in the euro area . So this is a very difficult s ituation. In the event that there is not agreement, I do see the potentia l for disruptions that could affect the European economic ou tlook and global financial marke ts. I would say that the United States has very limited direct e xposure to Greece, either throu gh trade and financial—or financial channels. But to the extent that there are impacts on the euro -area economy or on global June 17, 2015 Chair Yellen’s Press Conference FINAL  financial markets, there would undoubtedly be spillovers to the United States that would affect our outlook as well. CHRISTOPHER CONDON. Thank you. C hris Condon from Bloomberg Ne ws. Madam Chair, I’d like to come b ack to the topic of consumer spe nding. Consumer spending has been very disappointing for ma ny months in the U.S. economy. I ’m wondering, do you think there has been a meaningful shift, and one that will persist in the behavior of households, with respect to spending and savings ? Or would you be more inclined to look at the recent more encouraging retail sales figures and see perhaps a return of th e American consumer there? CHAIR YELLEN. So I think in rece nt weeks we have received data that suggest that consumer spending is growing at a moderate pace . I’d say, you know, car sales, for example, were very strong. Part of it proba bly represents payback for w eak sales during the winter months, but, nevertheless, the pa ce of car sales has been stron g. And recent readings on retail sales and on spending on services have suggested an improvement in the pace of consumer spending. There are questions at this poi nt about just how much impact we ’ve seen of lower energy prices on consumer spending. The d ecline in oil prices transla tes into an improvement in household income, on average, of something like $700 per househ old, and I’m not convinced yet by the data that we have seen the kind of response to that that I would ultimately expect. And I think it’s hard to know at this poi nt whether or not that refle cts a very cautious consumer that is eager to add to savings and t o work down borrowing. Or, in par t, some survey evidence suggests that consumers are not yet confid ent that the improvement they’ ve seen—the decline in their need to spend for energy, for gasoline—that that’s going to be something that will be permanent. June 17, 2015 Chair Yellen’s Press Conference FINAL  They may think it’s a transito ry change and not yet be respondi ng. So I think the jury is out there, but I think we have see n some pickup in household spendi ng. PETER BARNES. Peter Barnes, Fox B usiness. Madam Chair, I want ed to shift over to the decision in the AIG case this past Monday. And in it, the judge in the case said in his opinion, quote, “There is nothing in the Federal Reserve Act or any other federal statute that would permit a Federal Reserve Ba nk to take over a private corp oration and run its business as if the government were the owner, ye t that is precisely what the F ederal Reserve Bank of New York did,” and the judge went on to cite the replacement of AIG ’s chief executive officer and taking control of AIG’s business operations. I wanted to ask y ou, did the Fed break the law in assisting AIG back in the crisi s? And if this decision is uphe ld on appeal, how does that affect the Fed’s toolbox? How does it a ffect its ability to help firm s in trouble in a future financial crisis? Would it make that ki nd of assistance illegal, or woul d you have to get Congress to change the law and make a fix? Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN. So the Federal Res erve strongly believes that it s actions with respect to AIG in 2008 were legal, proper, and effective, and it believ es that they were necessary, given the threat that a disorderly f ailure of that company would have likely implications for the economy, for the flow of credit to households, in businesses in the economy. And it believes that the—we believe that the terms of that intervention were tough, and appropriately so, in order to protect taxpayers from the risks that those rescue loans presen ted at the time they were made. Now, I should emphasize that D odd-Frank changed our 13(3) autho rity and said that the Federal Reserve may not in a futur e crisis intervene to attempt to address the issues of a particular company. At the same time, it gave the government a set of new tools that it could use June 17, 2015 Chair Yellen’s Press Conference FINAL  in a situation like the AIG situ ation or Lehman to try to resol ve such a situation that poses systemic risks in an orderly way. The—I’d just say at this point, t he Federal Reserve under Dodd- Frank can continue, if necessary, in some future crisis to engage in broad-based progr ams similar to the program we had in effect—the programs we had in effect in 2008 to provide support for the issuance of asset- backed securities that enabled l oans to small businesses and to students and for credit cards and, you know, for credit throughout t he economy, or to support the issuance of commercial paper. At this point, I believe we are w orking with the Department of Justice to decide on next steps. MARK HAMRICK. Madam Chair, Mark H amrick with Bankrate.com. So much discussion about rising rates s eems to focus on the potential n egatives, and I’m wondering if you could talk a little b it if you envision some possible unintende d benefits of higher rates. And one of the things I’m thinking about i s the fact tha t savers have s uffered through so many years of miserly returns, and many may be actually anticipating in a pos itive way seeing a better return on their investment. Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN. So let me say, to my mind, the most important po sitive is that it—I believe a decision to raise rates would signify very clearly th at the U.S. economy has made great progress in recovering from the tr auma of the financial crisis and that we’re in a different place. I think, hopefully, that would be something that would be confi dence-inducing for many households and businesses. From the point of view of savers , of course this has been a ver y difficult period. Many retirees—and I hear from some a lmost every day—are really suffe ring from low rates that they had anticipated would bolster the ir retirement income. This, y ou know, obviously has been one of the adverse consequen ces of a period of low rates. June 17, 2015 Chair Yellen’s Press Conference FINAL  The—you know, we have a good reason for having kept rates at th e levels that we have. We—our charge from Congress is to pursue the goals of maximum e mployment and price stability. That’s what we’ve been doing. And obviously there are benefits from a strong economy to every household in the e conomy, including savers, fr om having a better job market and a more secure economy. But, ye s, when the time comes for u s to raise rates, I think there will be some benefits tha t flow through to savers. JIM PUZZANGHERA. Hi, Jim Puzzanghera from the L.A. Times . Just to follow up on that question, I think a lot of s avers, people on fixed incomes , were hopeful that they would see a rate increase if not this meeti ng, soon. What sort—what kind o f assurances can you give them and people out there who think the Fed is never going to raise rates? I’ve got some e-mails today from people saying, “They’re never going to raise rates.” What kind of assurance can you give to people who are waiting for that to happen? CHAIR YELLEN. I can’t give an i ronclad promise, but I think it ’s clear from our Summary of Economic Projections t hat we anticipate that the eco nomy will grow, that the labor market will improve, that inflation will move back up to 2 perc ent as we—is our objective over the medium term. And if economi c conditions unfold in the way that most of my colleagues and I anticipate, we see it as appr opriate to raise rates. And, as you can see, the largest number of participants anticip ate that those conditi ons should be in plac e later this year. Obviously, we have to—you know, there can be surprises—that mig ht not happen. It’s not an ironclad guarantee, but we an ticipate that that’s someth ing that will be appropriate later this year. MICHAEL DERBY. Mike Derby wit h Dow Jones Newswires. Could you shed some additional light on how large rev erse repo operations are likel y to be in their in itial phase? And, June 17, 2015 Chair Yellen’s Press Conference FINAL  additionally, how important are f inancial conditions to the pac e of the Fed’s tightening cycle? I mean, how important is the mark et’s reaction in determining how fast or slow and the ultimate endpoint of a Fed tightening cycle? CHAIR YELLEN. So, with respect to—you asked first about overni ght reverse repos. And we communicated in our minutes that the Committee has an in tention to make sure that they are available—overnight repos a re available in large quantity a t liftoff to ensure that we have a smooth liftoff, that there will be an elevated level of provisi on of overnight RRP. However, it is our expectation and plan that fair ly quickly after liftoff we w ill reduce the level of the overnight RRP facility, and we have a variet y of ways in which we can do that. With respect to market reactions , we always, in evaluating the economic outlook, have to take account of financial conditi ons, whether it’s the level of long-term interest rates or the value of the dollar in assessing the economic outlook. To the extent that there are market reactions and market movements, whether they’ re in reaction to decisions of o urs or in reaction to other events—foreign events or unfolding economic conditions—we will always take those into account in deciding on the appr opriate path of policy. STEVE BECKNER. Steve Beckne r of MNI. Madam Chair, good to see you. You mentioned that the dollar ha s stabilized. And, in fact, since mid-March, I believe it’s given up a good bit of its gains from last summer. To what extent now do you think that there will be an ongoing drag from the dollar, taki ng into account this dollar r etreat? And, overall, how important is the dollar exchange rate in monetary policy these days relative to the past? CHAIR YELLEN. Well, I think we s till are, since last summer—ha ve seen an appreciable increase in the valu e of the dollar vis-à-vis most of our trading partners, including emerging markets. So it is a si gnificant appr eciation of the d ollar, and I think we have seen that June 17, 2015 Chair Yellen’s Press Conference FINAL  it’s had a negative effect on net e xports and so served as some thing of a drag on the economy, and probably that drag is going to c ontinue for some time to co me. So it is a factor affecting the outlook. In addition, import pri ces for non-oil imports contin ue to fall, and I thi nk that’s serving to push down core inflation a littl e bit. Eventually, I expect that impact to ebb, but it is a factor affecting the outlook. That said, we obviously have no target for the dollar. We take movements in the dollar and its economic impact as one of many factors affecting the ou tlook. And, in spite of the appreciation of the dollar, the Committee obviou sly thinks that the economy is likely to do well enough to call—likely call for some tightening later this year. JOHN HELTMAN. Hi, John Heltman with American Banker . I’d like to ask a regulatory question, if I could. L ast month, Senator Elizabeth Warren and Congressman Elijah Cummings sent a letter to the GAO asking about an inquiry into the Fed and other regulators’ implementation of the Communit y Reinvestment Act, a concern bei ng that the CRA, as it’s implemented now, is not giving communities—blighted communities , like in Baltimore or other places—enough access to basic banking services. Do you think t hat the Fed is doing everything it can in its CRA implementation t o give access to those commun ities to these kinds of services? Do you think it needs to be doing more? CHAIR YELLEN. So we take CRA ver y seriously and evaluate for t hose banks that we supervise. We have a set of gui delines and are very conscienti ous in attempting to evaluate CRA performance. It’s something tha t we certainly take into accoun t in assessing applications that we receive for mergers, and we have very active programs to try to bring together community groups with banking organizations t o try to provide them with i nformation about how they can June 17, 2015 Chair Yellen’s Press Conference FINAL  assess community needs and best a ddress them. But we are looki ng at CRA and continue to look to see whether there are ways i n which implementation could be improved.