December 16, 2015 Chair Yellen’s Press Conference FINAL  Transcript of Chair Yellen’s Press Conference December 16, 2015 CHAIR YELLEN. Good afternoon. Earlier today, t he Federal Open Market Committ ee decided to raise the target rang e for the federal funds rate by ¼ percentage point , bringing it to ¼ to ½ percent. This action marks the end of an e xtraordinary seven-year period during which the federal funds rate was held near zero to s upport the recovery of the ec onomy from the worst financial crisis and recession since the G reat Depression. It also recog nizes the considerable progress that has been made toward restoring jobs, raising incomes, and easin g the economic hardship of millions of Americans. And it refl ects the Committee’s confide nce that the economy will continue to strengthen. The econom ic recovery has clearly come a long way, although it is not yet complete. Room for further improvement in the labor market remains, and inflation continues to run below our longer-run objective. But with the economy performing well and expected to continue to do so, the Committee judged that a mode st increase in the federal funds rate target is now appropriate, r ecognizing that even after thi s increase, monetary policy remains accommodative. As I will explain, the process of normalizing i nterest rates is likely to proceed gradually, although future policy actions will obviously depend on how the economy evolves relative to our objec tives of maximum employment and 2 percent inflation. Since March, the Committee has stated that it would raise the t arget range for the federal funds rate when it had seen furth er improvement in the labor ma rket and was reasonably confident that infla tion would move back t o its 2 percent objec tive over the medium term. In our judgment, these two criteri a have now been satisfied. The labor market has clearly show n significant further improvem ent toward our objective of maximum employment. So far this year, a total of 2.3 millio n jobs have been added to the December 16, 2015 Chair Yellen’s Press Conference FINAL  economy, and over the most recent three months, job gains have averaged an estimated 218,000 per month, similar to the avera ge pace since the beginning of t he year. The unemployment rate, at 5 percent in November, is dow n 0.6 percentage point from the end of last year and is close to the median of FOMC participants’ estimates of its longer-run no rmal level. A broader measure of unemployment that includes i ndividuals who want and are avai lable to work but have not actively searched recently and pe ople who are working part time but would rather work full time also has shown solid improvement . That said, some cyclical wea kness likely remains: The labor force participation rate is st ill below estimates of its demogr aphic trend, involuntary part-time employment remains somewhat el evated, and wage growth has yet t o show a sustained pickup. The improvement in employment conditions this year has occurred amid continued expansion in economic activit y. U.S. real gross domestic produ ct is estimated to have increased at an average pace of 2¼ percent ove r the first three quarters of the year. Net exports have been restrained by subdued foreign grow th and the appreciation of th e dollar, but this weakness has been offset by solid expansion of domestic spending. Continued job gains and increases in real disposable income have suppor ted household spending, and purcha ses of new motor vehicles have been particularly strong. Res idential investment has been rising at a faster pace than last year, although the level of new homebuilding still remains low. And outside of the drilling and mining sector, where lower oil pric es have led to substantial c uts in investment outlays, business investment has posted solid gains. The Committee currently expects that, with gradual adjustments in the stance of monetary policy, economic activity will continue to expand at a moderate pace and labor market indicators will continue to strengthen. Although developments abroad still pose risks to U.S. December 16, 2015 Chair Yellen’s Press Conference FINAL  economic growth, these risks app ear to have lessened since last summer. Overall, the Committee sees the risks to the outlook f or both economic activity and th e labor market as balanced. The anticipation of ongoing economic growth and additional impr ovement in labor market conditions is an importa nt factor underp inning the Commi ttee’s confidence that inflation will return to our 2 percent objective over the medium term. O verall consumer price inflation— as measured by the price index for personal consumption expendi tures—was only ¼ percent over the 12 months ending in October. However, much of the shortfal l from our 2 percent objective reflected the sharp declines in e nergy prices since the middle of last year, and the effects of these declines should dissip ate over time. The appreciation of the d ollar has also weighed on inflation by holding down import prices. As th ese transitory influences fade and as the labor market strengthens further, the Committ ee expects inflation to rise to 2 percent over the medium term. The Committee’s confidence in the inflation outlook rests impor tantly on its judgment that longer-run inflation expecta tions remain well anchored. I n this regard, although some survey measures of longer-run in flation expectations have edged down, overall they have been reasonably stable. Market-base d measures of inflation compensa tion remain near historically low levels, although the declines i n these measures over the pa st year and a half may reflect changes in risk and liquidity pr emiums rather than an outright decline in inflati on expectations. Our statement emphasizes that , in considering future policy dec isions, we will carefully monitor actual and expected progre ss toward our inflation goal. This general assessment of the outlook is reflected in the indi vidual economic projections submitted for this meeting by FOMC participants. As always, ea ch participant’s projections are conditioned on his or her own view of appropriate monetary poli cy. Participants’ p rojections for real GDP growth are little cha nged from the projections made in conjunction with the September December 16, 2015 Chair Yellen’s Press Conference FINAL  FOMC meeting. The median projec tion for real GDP growth is 2.1 percent for this year and rises to 2.4 percent in 2016, somew hat above the median estimat e of the longer-run normal growth rate. Thereafter, the median growth projection declines toward its longer-run rate. The median projection for the unemploym ent rate in the fourth quart er of this year stands at 5 percent, close to the median estimate of the longer-run norma l unemployment rate. Committee participants generally see the unemployment rate declining a li ttle further next year and then leveling out. The path of the med ian unemployment rate is slig htly lower than in September, and while the median longer-run normal unemployment rate has not ch anged, some participants edged down their estimates. Final ly, FOMC participants project inflation to be very low this year, largely reflecting lower prices for energy and non-energy imports. As the transitory factors holding down inflation abate and labor market conditions contin ue to strengthen, the median inflation projection rises fro m just 0.4 percent this year to 1 .6 percent next year and reaches 1.9 percent in 2017 and 2 percent in 2018. The path of the med ian inflation projec tions is little changed from September. With inflation currently still lo w, why is the Committee raisin g the federal funds rate target? As I have already note d, much of the recent softness i n inflation is due to transitory factors that we expect to abat e over time, and diminishing slac k in labor and product markets should put upward pressure on inf lation as well. In addition, we recognize that it takes time for monetary policy actions to affect future economic outcomes. We re the FOMC to delay the start of policy normalization for t oo long, we would likely end up ha ving to tighten policy relatively abruptly at some point to keep t he economy from overheating and inflation from significantly overshooting our objective. Such a n abrupt tightening could in crease the risk of pushing the economy into recession. December 16, 2015 Chair Yellen’s Press Conference FINAL  As I have often noted, the importa nce of our initial increase i n the target range for the federal funds rate should not be overstated: Even after today’ s increase, the stance of monetary policy remains accommodative, thereby supporting further improv ement in labor market conditions and a return to 2 percen t inflation. As we indicate d in our statement, “the Committee expects that economic conditions will evolve in a manner that w ill warrant only gradual increases in the federal funds rat e; the federal funds rate is likely to remain, for some time, below levels that are expected t o prevail in the longer run.” This expectation is consistent w ith the view that the neutral n ominal federal funds rate— defined as the value of the fed eral funds rate that would be ne ither expansionary nor contractionary if the econom y were operating near potential—is currently low by historical standards and is likel y to rise only gradua lly over time. One indication that the neutral funds rate is unusually low is that U.S. economic growth has been only mod erate in recent years despite the very low level of the federal f unds rate and the Federal Reserv e’s very large holdings of longer- term securities. Had the neutral rate been running closer to i ts longer-run level, these policy actions would have been expected to foster a much more rapid ec onomic expansion. The marked decline in the neutral federal funds rate may be par tially attributable to a range of persistent economic h eadwinds that have weighed on agg regate demand. Following the financial crisis, these headwinds included tighter underwriting standards and lim ited access to credit for some borrowers, de leveraging by many households to r educe debt burdens, contractionary fiscal policy, w eak growth abroad coupled with a significant appreciation of the dollar, slower productivity and labor force growth, and elevate d uncertainty about the economic outlook. Although the restraint imp osed by many of these facto rs has declined noticeably over December 16, 2015 Chair Yellen’s Press Conference FINAL  the past few years, some of the se effects have remained signifi cant. As these effects abate, the neutral federal funds rate s hould gradually move higher over ti me. This view is implicitly reflected in participants’ projections of appropriate monetary policy. The median projection for t he federal funds rate rises gradually to nearly 1½ percent in late 2016 and 2½ percent in late 201 7. As the factors restrain ing economic growth continue to fade over time, the median rate rises to 3¼ percent by the end of 2018, close to its longer-run normal level. Compared with the p rojections made in September, a number of participants lowered somewhat their paths for the federal funds rate, althou gh changes to the median path are fairly minor. I’d like to underscore that the forecasts of the appropriate pa th of the federal funds rate, as usual, are conditional on partic ipants’ individual projectio ns of the most likely outcomes for economic growth, employment and i nflation, and other factors. However, the actual path of the federal funds rate will depend on the economic outlook as infor med by incoming data. Stronger growth or a more rapid increase in inflation than we currently anticipate would suggest that the neutral federal funds rate was rising more quickly than expecte d, making it appropriate to raise the federal funds rate more quick ly as well. Conversely, if th e economy were to disappoint, the federal funds rate would likely rise more slowly. The Committee will continue i ts policy of reinvesting proceeds from maturing Treasury securities and principal payments from agency debt and mortgage -backed securities. As highlighted in our policy statemen t, we anticipate continuing t his policy “until normalization of the level of the federal funds rate is well under way.” Mainta ining our sizable holdings of longer-term securities should help maintain accommodative finan cial conditions and should December 16, 2015 Chair Yellen’s Press Conference FINAL  reduce the risk that the federa l funds rate might return to the effective lower bound in the event of future adverse shocks. Finally, in conjunction with our pol icy statement, we also rele ased an implementation note that provides details on the tools that we are using to ra ise the federal funds rate into the new target range. Specifically, the Board of Gov ernors raised the interest rate paid on required and excess reserves to ½ percent , and the FOMC authorized overn ight reverse repurchase operations at an offering rate of ¼ percent. Both of these cha nges will be effective tomorrow. To ensure sufficient monetary c ontrol at the onset of the norma lization process, we have, for the time being, suspended the aggreg ate cap on overnight reverse re purchase transactions that has been in place during the test ing phase of this facility. Recal l that the Committ ee intends to phase out this facility when it is no l onger needed to help control t he federal funds rate. The Board of Governors also approved a ¼ percen tage point increase in the di scount rate for primary credit to 1 percent. Based on the extensive testing of our policy tools in recent ye ars, the Committee is confident that the normalization process will proceed smoothly. Nonetheless, as part of prudent contingency planning, we will be monitoring financial market de velopments closely in the coming days and are prepared to make adjustments to our tools i f that proves necessary to maintain appropriate control over money market rates. Thank you. I will be happy to take your questions. MARTIN CRUTSINGER. Marty Crutsi nger with the Associated Press. I guess the word is “finally.” The—we have a sked you for so long, “Why were you delaying? Why were you delaying?” So, I’ll ask, given de velopments around the world t hat still—there is still weakness, and the inflation is still nowhere near your target. What made you say “Do it now”? Some have December 16, 2015 Chair Yellen’s Press Conference FINAL  said it was because you feared a lack of credibility if you did n’t move. Did that play a role in your decision? CHAIR YELLEN. We decided to move a t this time because we feel the conditions that we set out for a move—namely, furth er improvement in the labor market and reasonable confidence that inflation woul d move back to 2 percent over the medium term—we felt that these conditions had been satis fied. We have been concerned, a s you know, about the risks from the global economy, and those risk s persist, but the U.S. econo my has shown considerable strength. Domestic spending that accounts for 85 percent of ag gregate spending in the U.S. economy has continued to hold up. It’s grown at a solid pace. And while there is a drag from net exports, from relatively wea k growth abroad, and the apprec iation of the dollar, overall, we decided today that the risks t o the outlook for the labor marke t and the economy are balanced. And we recognize that monetary po licy operates with lags. We w ould like to be able to move in a prudent and, as we’ve em phasized, gradual manner. It ’s been a long time since the Federal Reserve has raised inter est rates, and I think it’s pru dent to be able to watch what the impact is on financial conditions and spending in the economy, and moving in a timely fashion enables us to do this. Again, I think it’s important not to overblow the significance of this first move. It’s only 25 basis points. It—monetary policy remains accommodative. We have indicated that we will be watching what happens very c arefully in the economy in terms of our actual and forecast— our projected conditions relative to our employment and inflati on goals and will adjust policy over time as seems appropriate t o achieve those goals. Our exp ectation, as I’ve indicated, is that policy adjustments will be gradual over time, but, of course, t hey will be informed by the outlook, which in turn will ev olve with incoming data. December 16, 2015 Chair Yellen’s Press Conference FINAL  STEVE LIESMAN. Madam Chair , thank you. Steve Liesman, CNBC. Under the old regime, before you were raising r ates, it was easy to understan d within your mandate what you wanted to do. You wanted the unempl oyment rate to fall, you wa nted inflation to rise, and it was easy for the public to judge the success or failure of your pol icy. Could you explain under the new regime what you’re looking for? Do you want the unemployme nt rate to stop falling? Do you want it to rise? And what i s it you hope for from inflatio n, which I think is a little more understandable, or is “neutral ” itself now a policy goal? CHAIR YELLEN. “Neutral” is not a policy goal. It is an assess ment. It’s a benchmark that I think is usual—is usefu l for assessing the stance of pol icy. Neutral is essentially a stance of policy, a level of short-term r ates, which, if the economy w ere operating near its potential— and we’re reasonably not quite a t that, but reasonably close to it—it would be a level that would maintain or sustain those condi tions. So, at this point, polic y we judge to be accommodative. The Committee forecasts that the unemployment rate will continu e to decline, and I think that’s important and appropriate for tw o reasons. First of all, as I’ ve indicated, I continue to judge that there remains slack in the econom y, margins of slack that are n ot reflected in the standard unemployment rate, and, in partic ular, I’ve pointed to the depr essed level of labor force participation and also the somewhat abnormally high level of pa rt-time employment. So a further decline in the unemploy ment rate and strengthening of l abor market conditions will help to erode those margins of slac k. But also we want to see infla tion move up back to our 2 percent objective over the medium term , and so seeing above-trend growt h and continuing tightness— greater tightness in labor and pr oduct markets—I think that wil l help us achieve our objective as well with respect to inflation. December 16, 2015 Chair Yellen’s Press Conference FINAL  STEVE LIESMAN. Just to follo w up, how does raising rates help get you to either of those goals? CHAIR YELLEN. We have kept rates at an extremely low level and had a high balance sheet for a very long time. We ha ve considered the risks to th e outlook and worried about the fact that with interest rates at zero, we have less scope to re spond to negative shocks than to positive shocks that would call for a tightening of policy. Th at is a factor that has induced us to hold rates at zero for this long. B ut we recognize that policy is accommodative, and if we do not begin to slightly reduce the amount of accommodation, the odds are good that the economy would end up overshooting both our employment and inflation obj ectives. What I—we would like to avoid is a situation whe re we have waited so long that we’re forced to tighten policy abruptly, which risks aborting w hat I would like to see as a ve ry long-running and sustainable expansion. So to keep the econom y moving along the growth path it’s on with improving and solid conditions in labor marke ts, we would like to avoid a sit uation where we have left so much accommodation in place for so long that we overshoot these obje ctives and then have to tighten abruptly and risk damaging—damaging that performance. JON HILSENRATH. Chair Yelle n, Jon Hilsenrath from the Wall Street Journal . In the sentence in your statement about g radual increases, in that sec tion, the Committee says that it “will carefully monitor” progress—actual and expected progress on inflation. That’s going to read like some kind of code to a l ot of people on Wall Street. Can you describe—what do you mean when you say “carefully mon itor”? And, speci fically, with regard to what you do next, do you need to see inflation actuall y rise at this point in order to raise interest rates again? CHAIR YELLEN. Well, we recogni ze that inflati on is well below our 2 percent goal. The entire Committee is comm itted to achieving our 2 percent in flation objective over the December 16, 2015 Chair Yellen’s Press Conference FINAL  medium term, just as we want to make sure that inflation doesn’ t persist at levels above our 2 percent objective. The Comm ittee is equally committed—this i s a symmetric goal—and the Committee is equally committed t o not allowing inflation to per sist below our 2 percent objective. Now, I’ve tried to explain—and many of my colleagues have as we ll—why we have reasonable confidence that inf lation will move up over time, an d the Committee declared it had reasonable confidence. Nevertheless, that is a forecast, and w e really need to monitor over time actual inflation performance to m ake sure that it is conforming , it is evolving, in the manner that we expect. So it doesn’t mean t hat we need to see inflation re ach 2 percent before moving again, but we have expectations for how inflation will behave. And we re we to find that the underlying theory is not bearing out, tha t it is not behaving in the manne r that we expect, and that it doesn’t look like the shortfall is tra nsitory and disappearing with tig hter labor markets, that would certainly give us pause. And we have indicated that we’ re reasonably close—not quite the re, but reasonably close—to achieving our maximum em ployment objective, but we hav e a significant shortfall on inflation. And so we’re calling a ttention to the importance of verifying our—that things evolve in line with our forecasts. JON HILSENRATH. Just to fo llow up, do you need to see it rise? Not necessarily get to the 2 percent goal, but in orde r to move again, do you want to see inflation measures actually moving higher? CHAIR YELLEN. I’m not going to gi ve you a simple formula for w hat we need to see on the inflation front in order t o raise rates again. We’ll al so be looking at the path of employment as well as the pat h for inflation. But if incoming data were—led us to call into December 16, 2015 Chair Yellen’s Press Conference FINAL  question the inflation forecast that we have set out, and that could be a variety of different kinds of evidence, that would certainly give the Committee pause. Bu t I don’t want to say there’s a simple benchmark. We—you know, the C ommittee expects inflation —over the next year, the median expectation is for in flation to be running about 1.6 per cent, and—both core and headline. So we do expect it to be moving up, but we don’t expect it to r each 2 percent. CRAIG TORRES. Hi, Madam Chair, C raig Torres from Bloomberg. I ’d like to follow Jon’s question. The way the Com mittee describes inflation—well , there’s this “transitory” language. I’d like to point out tha t oil prices today are at 3 6, and on June 15, they were $60. So, this “transitory,” which first appeared in the statement in Dec ember, I believe, is lasting a long, long time, maybe longer than ma ny people’s definition of “trans itory,” and it could go on. And, second, I really wonder if the Committee knows how quickly wage increases or labor market tightness transfers into higher prices, and that too is also a forecast. So, my question: What will you be willing to do if you don’t see progress toward 2 percent inflation? We missed the target for three years, and, you know, w hat would you be willing to do ? And, second, would you allow inflation to bounce around betw een 2 and 3 percent the way you’ ve allowed it to move under 2 percent over the past several years? Thanks. CHAIR YELLEN. First, let me say w ith respect to oil prices, I have been surprised by the further downward movement in oil prices, but we do not need to see oil prices rebound to higher levels in order for the impact on inflation to wash out. So all they need to do is stabilize. I believe there is some limit below which oil prices are unlike ly to rise. If we look—to fall. If we look at market expectations, mar ket expectations are for sta bilization and then some gradual upward movement. So I certainly g rant that we’ve had a series of shocks pushing them down, December 16, 2015 Chair Yellen’s Press Conference FINAL  but we’re not looking for them t o revert back to the—to higher levels that they were at merely to stabilize. We—I would point out, you asked me , would we tolerate overshoot s. For a number of years between 2004 and 2008, we had a s eries of increases in oi l prices that for a series of years raised inflation above—again, we didn’t have a 2 percent object ive then, but—raised it above 2 percent, and we judged those incr eases to be transitory as we ll and looked through them. We do monitor inflation expectations very carefully. If we saw in a meaningful way that inflation expectations were either movi ng up in a way that made it—them s eem unanchored or down, that would be of concern. And we have called attention to some slig ht downward movements in survey measures. We are watchi ng that, but I still judge that inflation expectations are reasonably well anchored. So, yes , we have tolerated inflation shortfalls that we thought would disappear over the medium term j ust as we did overshoots of inf lation that we also judged to be transitory. But we do need to mon itor inflation very carefully because if energy prices and the dollar were to stabilize, impor t prices, our expectation is tha t both headline and core inflation would move up. And if we failed t o see that occurring in the m anner that we expect, of course we need to take further action to reconsider the outlook and to put in place appropriate policy. CRAIG TORRES. What woul d that action look like? CHAIR YELLEN. Well, you know, if the economy were disappointin g, we—you know, our actions wouldn’t purely be based on inflatio n, we would als o take employment into account. So I can’t give you a simple an swer, but we would pursue a more accommodative policy because we do—certainly are committed to achieving 2 percent over the m edium term. BINYAMIN APPELBAUM. Binya Appelbaum, the New York Times . Bill Dudley has talked about the need for the F ed to adjust policy based on the responsiveness of financial December 16, 2015 Chair Yellen’s Press Conference FINAL  markets as you begin to increase rates. You didn’t talk about that today. Is it a point that you agree with? And, if so, what is it that you’re looking for? H ow will you judge whether financial markets are accepting and transmitting these changes? CHAIR YELLEN. Well, there are num ber of different channels thr ough which monetary policy is transmitted to spending decisions. The behavior of l onger-term—longer-term interest rates, short-term interest rate s matter. The value of asset pr ices and the exchange rate, also— these are transmission channels. We wouldn’t be focused on sho rt-term financial volatility, but were there unanticipat ed changes in financi al conditions that w ere persistent and we judged to affect the outlook, we would of cour se have to take those into account. So we will watch financial developments, but what we’re looking at here is the l onger-term economic outlook: Are we seeing persistent changes in financial market conditions that would have a bearing, a significant bearing, on the outlook that we would need to take account in formulating appropriate policy? Yes, we would, but it’s not short-term volatility in m arkets. BINYAMIN APPELBAUM. In part, what I was attempting to say is, if you didn’t see changes, you would be concerned a nd have to move more, quickly. Are you concerned that if markets don’t tighten suffici ently you may need to do more? CHAIR YELLEN. Well, look, you know, w e—this is not an unantici pated policy move, and we have been trying to expl ain what our policy strategy is. So it’s not as though I’m expecting to see a marked, immed iate reaction in financial mark ets. Expectations about Fed policy have been built into the str ucture of financial market p rices, but we obviously will track carefully the behavior of both s hort- and longer-term interest rates, the dollar, and asset prices, and if they move in persistent a nd significant ways that are ou t of line with the expectations that we have, then of course we will take those into account. December 16, 2015 Chair Yellen’s Press Conference FINAL  REBECCA JARVIS. Thank you. Rebecca Jarvis, ABC News. Histori cally, most economic expansions fade after this long. How confident are yo u that our economy won’t slip back into recession in the near term? CHAIR YELLEN. So let me start b y saying that I feel confident about the fundamentals driving the U.S. economy, the health of U.S. households, and do mestic spending. There are pressures on some sectors of the economy, particularly manufact uring and the energy sector, reflecting global developments and developments in commodity ma rkets and energy markets, but the underlying health of the U.S . economy I consider to be quit e sound. I think it’ s a myth that expansions die of old age. I do not think that they die of old age. So the fact that this has been quite a long expansion doesn’t l ead me to believe that it’s one that has—its days are numbered. But the economy does get hit by shocks, and there are both posi tive shocks and negative shocks. And so there is a significan t odd, you know, probability in any year that the economy will suffer some shock that we don’t know about that will put it into reces sion. And so I’m not sure exactly how high that probability is i n any year, but maybe at least on the order of 10 percent. So, yes, there is some probability tha t that could happen, and of course we’d appropriately respond, but it isn’t something that is fated to happen because we’ve had a lon g expansion, and I don’t see anything in the underlying stren gth of the economy that would l ead me to be concerned about that outcome. REBECCA JARVIS. In the event of an outcome like that, in the m ost negative of scenarios, are there other polic y measures outside of interest rates, outside of traditional quantitative easing, that you ins ide of the Fed have discussed and contemplated for another environment like something whic h we saw throughout the Great Re cession? Have you talked about anything that would be mor e direct to the economy? December 16, 2015 Chair Yellen’s Press Conference FINAL  CHAIR YELLEN. Well, during the years in which we were—you know , the economy was recovering from the Great R ecession and we put further poli cy and measures in place, we studied our policy op tions quite carefully. As you know, commu nications policy to affect market expectations about the path of int erest rates played an importa nt role. That’s something we did in conjunction with asset purchases . Obviously, we lowered our overnight interest rate effectively to zero. Now, we have seen some foreign central ba nks, Europe—the ECB and others—that have taken their ove rnight rate int o negative terri tory, and that’s something that—I don’t contemplate that we will need to do this, but it is somet hing that we could study. Of course, we have balance sheet po licies, and there might be a ra nge of direct polic ies that we could use as well. But this is something that we have thought about, our range of options. SAM FLEMING. Sam Fleming. Sam Fleming from the Financial Times . Could I ask about the balance sheet policy you ’re adopting today? You’ve s aid that you want to keep a large balance sheet until normaliza tion is “well under way.” Could y ou explain first of all why you anticipate that being appropriate? What does “well under way” mean in terms of normalization? And, longer term, what are your view s on the idea that the Fed might need to have a larger balance sheet tha n historically over t he longer term? CHAIR YELLEN. Well, in our normali zation principles, which are in effect, the Committee stated that we eventua lly want to operate with a much smaller balance sheet of—than we have at present. The—we woul d reduce the size of the balanc e sheet to essentially whatever size we needed to manage moneta ry policy effective—in an effect ive and efficient way. Now, a lot has changed since pre–financia l crisis in term s of the fina ncial system, and we are studying— we are engaging in a project at th is time to consider what our long-run operating framework should look like. So I can’t te ll you exactly what size of bal ance sheet we will determine is the December 16, 2015 Chair Yellen’s Press Conference FINAL  best to operate in an efficient and effective manner. It might be somewhat larger than the very tiny quantity of reserves that we had in pre-crisis. We have n ot determined that. We have also said that we will—we expect to reduce the size of our balance s heet over time by cease— diminishing or ceasing entir ely reinvestments. And, beyond tha t, we haven’t given additional guidance other than to say tha t the timing of reductions in rei nvestment will depend on economic and financial conditions. And I s uppose the additional guidanc e we’re giving today, when we say “well under way,” we want to s ee—as I mentioned, there are number of considerations, and the Committee has made no further decisions about this, but as we’ve discussed, the factors that will be relevant to the decision—on e factor that we’ve talked a bout is the desirability of having some scope to respond to an adve rse shock to the economy by low ering the federal funds rate. And so it would be nice to have a buffer in terms of having rai sed the federal funds rate to a certain extent to give us some meaningful scope to respond. No w, I don’t have in mind any particular level of the feder al funds rate. It would depend on the entire economic outlook, how robust the economy is. But that is an important consideration for the Committee, and it means that this is not something that we expect to be turning to, to cease reinvestment very quickly. PETER BARNES. Peter Barnes at Fox Business, ma’am. On financi al market conditions, is there a problem developing in the high-yield sec tor of the bond market, the junk bond sector? As you know, last week a mutual fund, Third Avenu e Management, halted redemptions so that it wouldn’t have to—because of a sharp sell off in these kinds of bonds. Are you concerned at all, and did you di scuss in the meeting, any r isk to the financial system, a systemic risk, because of the conditions in the junk bond marke t? And, you know, individual investors and institutions hol d trillions of dollars of these b onds, which were sold heavily December 16, 2015 Chair Yellen’s Press Conference FINAL  because of low rates, and did the Fed’s low interest rate polic y help lay—sow the seeds for this development? Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN. Well, risk spread s in the high-yield bond market have been widening since last year, partly refl ecting falling oil prices—only part ly, but partly—and redemptions in high-yield bond funds have been inc reasing in recent months. B ut Third Avenue Focused Credit Fund was a rather unusual open- end mutual fund. It had very co ncentrated positions in especially risky and illiqui d bonds, and it had been facing ver y significant redemption pressures. My understanding is that the SEC i s in touch with Third Avenue. And, as you probably know, the SEC has proposed some reforms to address what’s a structura l problem of liquidity mismatch in open-end mutual funds. So we continue to believe that f inancial conditions are support ive of economic growth. We will be—we have been and will c ontinue to track developments in financial markets very carefully. I would sa y that I think we have a far more resilie nt financial system now than we had prior to the financial crisis and highly capital[ized] banks th at are well situated to support corporate lending. I’d also point out that many corpor ations during these years ha ve reduced their interest payments and extended their de bt profiles, and I think that sho uld help to mitigate spillovers, but we will be evaluati ng this carefully. YLAN MUI. Hi, Ylan from the Washington Post . You said earlier that expansions don’t die of old age, but I think the ot her half of that is that it’s often central banks that kill them off instead. So I’m wondering how worried you are about the possib ility that the Fed will have to turn around after hiking rates. O ther central banks that have tried to raise rates have had to do just that. And how damaging you think t hat might be to the Fed ’s credibility? December 16, 2015 Chair Yellen’s Press Conference FINAL  CHAIR YELLEN. So, whe n you say that central banks often kill t hem, I think the usual reason that that has been true wh en that has been true is that central banks have begun too late to tighten policy, and they’ve allowe d inflation to get out of con trol. And at that point, they have had to tighten policy very abrupt ly and very substantially, and it’s caused a downturn, and the downturn has served to lower inflation. So, if you don’t mind my flipping the question on you, I would point out that it is because we don’t want to cause a rec ession through that type of dynamic at some future date that it is prudent to begin early a nd gradually. Now, it is true that some centr al banks have raised rates and l ater turned around. Not in every case has that reflected a policy mistake. Economies are subject to shocks. Sometimes when they have raised rates, it hasn’t been the wrong thing to do, but conditions have changed in a way that they have had to rev erse policy to respond to shocks . I’m not denying that there are situations where central banks h ave moved too early. We have considered the risk of that . We have weighed that risk ca refully in making today’s decision. I don’t believe w e’ll have to do it. But, look, you know, as I’ve—as the Committee has said, we’re watching economic developments closely, and we will adjust policy in whatever way is necessary to support the attainment of our objectives. JIM PUZZANGHERA. Hi, Jim Puzzanghera from the L.A. Times . You said it’s important not to overblow the significance to this first move, but, as you know, there’s been a lot of attention paid to it. Ca n you explain to average Americans what if anything might be different in the next few weeks or few mont hs for them because of this in terest rate hike? CHAIR YELLEN. So I think the first —the first thing that Americ ans should realize is that the Fed’s decision today ref lects our confidence in the U. S. economy, that we believe we have seen substantial improveme nt in labor market conditions, a nd while things may be uneven December 16, 2015 Chair Yellen’s Press Conference FINAL  across regions of the country a nd different industrial sectors, we see an economy that is on a path of sustainable improvement. S o, in thinking about their labor market prospects and their financial prospects going forw ard, I hope they will take this d ecision as one that signals the FOMC’s confidence that conditions will continue to strengthen a nd job market prospects will be good. It is a very small move. It wil l be reflected in some changes in borrowing rates. Longer- term interest rates—loans that are linked to longer-term intere st rates are unlikely to move—to move very much. Some—for example , some corporate loans are lin ked to the prime rate, which is likely to move up with the fe d funds rate, and those interes t rates will adjust. There are some consumer borrowing rates, I think c redit card rates, that are l inked to short-term rates that might move up slightly. But, remember, w e have very low rates, and w e have made a very small move. JOHN HELTMAN. Madam Chair, John Heltman with American Banker. How concerned are you with interest rate risk in banks now that you ’ve obviously ended the zero-rate era and began the 0.25 percent–rate era? Is that a factor in d ecisions going forward? Is it something that you’re concerned about? CHAIR YELLEN. Interest rate ris k at banks is something that we have been monitoring very carefully for quite a long time. The community banks and smaller banking organizations that we work with—part of our supe rvision has been ensuring tha t they manage appropriately for interest rate risk. And the lar ger banking organizations that are subject to the stress tests and capital planning—the scenarios t hat we have presented in each o f the last three years look at their ability to withstand what would be much sharper increases in in terest rates than we’re envisioning would happen. But we want to make sure that if the re were sharper increases— unlike our expectati ons—that they would be well positioned to h andle it. And we have December 16, 2015 Chair Yellen’s Press Conference FINAL  concluded that—that their capital positions are sufficient for them to weather it. So this has been very much on our minds. LINDSAY DUNSMUIR. Hi, Lindsa y Dunsmuir with Reuters. You keep saying that the things holding back inflation are t ransitory, and yet every day there seems to be new impulses from outside that look that they could drive prices lower. I g uess my question is, if in a year’s time inflation remains where i t is today, would you see that as a defeat for your theory? And is that part of the reason why the la nguage has been upgraded in t he statement to say that you want to see actual progress towa rds your 2 percent target? CHAIR YELLEN. Well, we have sai d that we will carefully monito r both actual and expected progress. You know, I t hink that standard Fed policy has been to look through shocks that are transitory. Occasionall y, there are sequences of tran sitory shocks. We have had some further declines in energy pr ices, and, you know, as I said pre viously, I do expect there is a bottom to that. I expect we w ill be seeing it. If we—if we an alyze inflation data and conclude that, clearly, transitory inf luences are holding down inflation , I do not want to say that we would respond to that. But if we concl uded that there were structura l factors or that there were a problem with our theory or some gl obal deflationary force that were simply persistently holding down inflation in a way that was not transitory —and I don’t wan t to attach any simplistic meaning to what we would need to s ee to conclude that in the in flation data, but if we concluded that, we certainly would take ac tion to make sure we adjusted p olicy so that we attain our 2 percent objective. But we w ould need to feel that what we we re seeing in the data suggested a sustained departure from our 2 per cent objective that we really needed to address. GREG ROBB. Greg Robb from Mark etWatch. There’s been a lot of talk today and a lot of discussion about the downside risks facing the economy from, you know, the global December 16, 2015 Chair Yellen’s Press Conference FINAL  environment, but you say in your state ment that the risks are n early balanced. So should—could you talk more about the upside ri sks that you see t o the econom y? And, just briefly, the—some Fed officials have been emphasizi ng lately the median CPIs from Dallas and Cleveland. How much weight do you put on those measures? CHAIR YELLEN. Well, starting wit h the median CPIs, we look at a range of statistics that bear on the inflation outl ook, and the median CPI has been somewhat more stable and running closer to 2 percent than t he PCE, but there is a system atic gap between these two measures, and our objective is 2 per cent on the PCE price index , and so there’s no simple translation. We do have a PCE i nflation objective. Sorry, let ’s see, the other—the upside risks. So I—there are upside risks to the economy, and I think, you kn ow, we tend to focus on the downside risk. It’s right to do so. We want to be careful abo ut downside risks. But consumers are in much healthier financial condition. Their income prospe cts have improved. We see them buying a lot of cars. Housing has been recovering very slowly, but the demographics would point to considerable upside for residential investment. My ma inline forecast is for gradual recovery, but there is upside r isk there. We have seen that th e decline in drilling has been depressing investment spending, but there’s upside risk too. T he global economy—we tend to focus—there are many countries t hat are undergoing very difficu lt adjustments or slowing growth, especially with declini ng commodity prices. But even r ecently, we’ve seen growth in emerging markets strengthe n. And—so it is not only downside ri sks, but, you know, we do pay attention to downside risks. But the Committee said they regar d the risks overall as balanced. STEVE BECKNER. Chair Yellen, Steve Beckner of MNI. You have o ften said that the Fed is going to be data depende nt, but you’ve also said in the past that you want to avoid being mechanical. Now, if the data see m to warrant rate hikes at suc cessive meetings, how will you December 16, 2015 Chair Yellen’s Press Conference FINAL  avoid the perception—a market pe rception—that you ’re falling in to a pattern or becoming mechanical? CHAIR YELLEN. Well, we will tr y to avoid that. I do want to e mphasize that while we have said “gradual,” gradual doe s not mean mechanical, evenly t imed, equally sized interest rate changes. So that is not what the Committee means by it. My gu ess is that the economy will progress in a manner that is not sufficiently even that we will decide to make evenly spaced hikes. I recognize we want to do w hat’s appropriate, and I rec ognize that’s a danger. But I do want to assure you that we will be data dependent. As the outl ook evolves, w e’ll respond appropriately. I strongly doubt that it will mean equally spac ed hikes, and it certainly is not the intention of the Committee to fo llow any mechanical formula of that type. BRENDAN GREELEY. Brendan Greel ey, Bloomberg. You just mention ed that it may be possible that structural f actors are holding down inflation as well, and the dynamic that’s happening in top-line inflation i s happening in core as well. In September, the median projection was revised down. Again today, t he median projection was revis ed down, and this is happening at other central banks as well . Additionally, markets see much lower inflation in the future than central bank models do. Within the Fed, how are you adapting y our models to look at what is now—seems to be a new reality, a nd what are you learning as you do that? CHAIR YELLEN. Well, so the reas on—the main reason that we revi sed down our projection ever so slightly—it’s hardly revised f or core inflat ion—is because we have seen further appreciation of the dolla r that’s holding down import p rices that spills over into core inflation. I mean, my own estim ation is that core inflation wi ll pick up. There are various idiosyncratic factors that affect core inflation—for example, n onmarket price increases, which are a little bit hard to underst and, have been running at a slo w pace. There were factors that have December 16, 2015 Chair Yellen’s Press Conference FINAL  been affecting inflation in medi cal care prices that may change over time. So there is some idiosyncratic factors. But I pe rsonally don’t think we’re in a world where inflation is being determined in a different way t han it has historically. I see import prices and energy prices as holding down headline but also core, and I do believe it will p ick up. But as we’ve said, if that theory is wrong and we do not see in flation is unfolding in the way the Committee expects, we will make adjustments over time in policy. BRENDAN GREELEY. You have a background as an academic. Are yo u looking into these models to see whether they need to be adapted? CHAIR YELLEN. I mean, we have m any people who are studying inf lation models. I’ve, you know, tried to—let me express some humility about the m. I do not think that they’re perfect. Monetary policy is based on economic forecasts. Ther e are theories of how the economy works that govern many a spects of economic forecasting. Whether it’s consumer spending or residential invest ment or inflation, the underlying theories are not perfect, and they are subject to uncertainty. And thi s is true in all aspects of forecasting, which is why we change our forecasts and our models. We throw out models that are per sistently not working. We’re always trying to develop better models. I’m not aware, I will say, of a different model of inflation that would be superior to the one that we employ. Bu t we have to verify that inflation is moving in the manner that we e xpect, and if it’s not, we need t o adjust policy accordingly. JEREMY TORDJMAN. Hello, Jeremy T ordjman with Agence France-Pre sse, AFP. Are you concerned about the negative im pact that your decision coul d have on the emerging markets? Do you fear it could trigge r some financial turbulenc es abroad that could eventually hit the U.S.? December 16, 2015 Chair Yellen’s Press Conference FINAL  CHAIR YELLEN. So we are consta ntly monitoring foreign economic developments, including those in emerging mar kets. We understand that in the global economy, with integrated product and capital markets, that our fates are very much linke d, and that the performance of the U.S. economy has important spillo vers onto emerging markets and vice versa. We have been trying very carefully—we’ve made a commitment to emerging marke t policymakers that we would do our best to communicate as clearly as we could about o ur policy intentions to avoid spillovers that might result from abrupt or unanticipated polic y moves. I think this move has been expected and well communicat ed—at least, I hope that it ha s. So I don’t think it’s a surprise. This action takes plac e in the context of a U.S. eco nomy that is doing well and is a source of strength to the emer ging markets and other economies around the globe. And so—that is, there can be negative spillovers through capital flows, but remember, there are also positive spillovers from a strong U.S. economy. My general view is that many emerging markets are in a stronger position than they would have been in the 1990s—for ex ample, that they have stronger macroeconomic policies. They have taken steps to strengthen th eir financial systems and are better positioned to deal with thi s. On the other hand, there are vulnerabilities there, and there are countries that have bee n badly affected by declining commod ity prices, so we will monitor this very carefully. But we have taken care to avoid unnecessa ry negative spillovers. NANCY MARSHALL-GENZER . Nancy Marshall-Genzer with Marketplace. Wage growth is not quite whe re you would like it to be— CHAIR YELLEN. I’m sorry, what? NANCY MARSHALL-GENZER. Wage gr owth is not quite where you woul d like it to be. How much is that going t o play into your thinking next yea r as you’re trying to decide whether to raise interest rates more and when? December 16, 2015 Chair Yellen’s Press Conference FINAL  CHAIR YELLEN. So my expectation i s that in a strengthening lab or market that we would see faster wage growth, and I believe there is, with the 2 percent inflati on objective, space for wage growth to be higher th an it’s been. We may be seeing some incipient signs of faster wage growth. We’ve seen a pic kup in measures of hourly compens ation and some slight firming in recent months in average hour ly earnings. I hesitate to say that this is a firm trend. We’ve been disappointed in the past. Wag e growth is not—there are ma ny factors that affect it—it’s not definitive in any sense i n determining our policy, but it d oes have a bearing on the inflation outlook. It also has a beari ng on assessing how much slack the re is in the labor market, and I think a number of my colleagues looking at the slow pace of wag e growth have—you’ve seen that their estimates of the longer-run normal unemployment rate have come down. And I think that is one of the factors that has prompted those adjustments. So, you know, it does affect views about just how much slack there i s in the labor market and the inflation outlook.